BusinessCulinaryArchitecture
ComputerGenerallnterest
        SciencesBiography
AccountingFinanceMathematics
HistorySelf-ImprovementHealth
EngineeringGraphic Design
Applied SciencesPsychology
InteriorDesignBiologyChemistry





        00K
    JOSSEY-BAS

    J K LASSER

    WILEY-LISS

    WILEY-INTERSCIENCE

ROCKET
SCIENCE
FOR TRADERS
FOR TRADERS

 WILEYTRADING

 Beyond CandlesticksfSteve Nison
 Beyond Technical Analysis, Second
 Contrary OpinionlR.Earl Hadady   Editionl'hshar Chande
 Cybernetic Trading StrategieslMurrayA. Ruggiero, Jr.
 Encyclopedia of Chart PatternslThomasBulkowski
 Expert TradingSystemslJohnR. Wolberg     Jr.
 Four Stepsto Trading SuccesslJohnF. Clayburg
 Fundamental AnalysislJackSchwager
 Gaming the MarketlRonaldB. Shelton
 Genetic Algorithmsand Investment StrategieslRichard J. Bauer, Jr.
 Intermarket Technical AnalysislJohn J. Murphy
 Long-Term Secretsto Short-Term Tradingllarry Williams     Jr.
 Macro Tradingand Investment StrategieslGabriel Burstein
 Managed TradinglJack Schwager
 McMillan on OptionslLawrence G. McMillan
 Neural Network Time Series ForecastingofFinancial MarketslE. MichaelAzoff
 New Market Timing TechniqueslThomasR. DeMark
 Nonlinear PricinglChristopher T. May    Financial Markets/E. Michael Azoff
 Option Market MakinglAlan J.Baird
 Option Strategies, Second EditionlCourtney Smith
 Pattern, Price e9 TimelJamesA. Hyerczyk
 Point and Figure ChartinglThomas J.Dorsey
 Profitsfrom Natural ResourceslRoland A. Jansen
 Rocket Sciencefor Traders: Digital Signal ProcessingApplicationsfJohnF. Ehlers
 Schwager on Futures1 Jack Schwager
 SeasonalitylJakeBernstein
 Stock Index Futures
 Study Guide for    e9 OptionslSusan Abbott Gidel        E.     Ehlers
 Study Guide toTrading fora LivinglDr. Alexander Elder
 Study Guide toAccompany Fundamental AnalysislJackSchwager
 Accompany TechnicalAnalysislJack Schwager
 Technical AnalysislJack Schwager
 Technical Analysisof the Options MarketslRichardHexton
 Technical MarketIndicatorslRichard J. Bauer, Jr., and Julie R. Dahlquist
 The Day Trader'sManuallWilliam F. Eng
 The Dynamic Option Selection SystemlHowardL. Simons    Dahlquist
 The HedgeFund EdgelMark Boucher
 The Intuitive TraderlRobert Koppel
 The Mathematics of Money ManagementlRalph Vince
 The NewMarket WizardslJack Schwager
 The New Money
 ManagementlRalphVince
 The New Options Market, Fourth EditionlMax Ansbacher
 The New Science of Technical AnalysislThomas R. DeMark
 The New Technical Traderlnshar Chande and StanleyS. Kroll
 The Option AdvisorlBernie G. Schaeffer     R. DeMark
 The Options CourselGeorgeA. Fontanills        Kroll
 The Options Course WorkbooklGeorgeA. Fontanills
 The Trader's Tax Survival Guide, RevisedEditionlTed Tesser
 The Trader's TaxSolutionlTed Tesser     Fontanills
 The Trading GumelRyan Jones
 The Ultimate Trading GuidelJohn Hill, George Pruitt, Lundy Hill
 The Visual InvestorlTohn1. Mumhv
 Trader Vic IIlVicto; Sperandeo x ,
 Trading Applicationsof Iapanese Candlestick ChartinglGaryWagner and Brad Matheny
 Trading ChaoslBillWilliams
 Zkadinn fora LivindDr. Alexander Elder        and Brad Matheny
 Trading Systems $Methods, Third EditionlPerry Kaufman
 Trading the PlanlRobertDee1     Elder
 Trading to WinlAri Kiev
 Trading with Crowd PsychologyICarl Gyllenram
 Trading without FearlRichard W. Arms, Jr.
Trading with Crowd Psychology/Carl Gyllenram
Trading without Fear/Richard W. Arms, Jr.

    ROCKET
    SCIENCE
    FOR TRADERS
   Digital Signal Processing Applications
   Digital Signal Processing Applications


    John F. Ehlers
    John F. Ehlers









        John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 New York Chichester Weinheim Brisbane Singapore 0 Toronto
New York Chichester ® Weinheim © Brisbane Singapore » Toronto

    T h i s book is printed on acid-free paper.@
    Copyright 0 2001 byJohn F.Ehlers. All rights reserved.
    Published by John Wiley hSons, Inc.     reserved.
    Published simultaneously in Canada.
    N o part of this publicationmay be reproduced,stored in a retrieval system or transmit-
    ted in any form
                   or by any means,electronic, mechanical,photocopying, recording,scan-
    ning or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United
    States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or
    authorization through paymentof the appropriate per-copy feeto the Copyright Clear-
    ance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978)750-8400, fax (978)750-
    4744. Requests to the Publisherfor permission shouldbe addressed to thePermissions
    Department, John Wiley hSons, Inc., 605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158-0012,
    (212)850-6011, fax (212)850-6008, E-Mail: PERMREQ@WKEY.COM. Permissions
    This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
                                                                              in regard
    to thesubject mattercovered. It is sold with the understandingthat thepublisher is not
    engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assis-
to tance is required, the servicesof a competent professional personshould be sought.
                          or                                       expert assis-
    Library of Congress Cotdoging-in-Publicotion Doto: person should be sought.
    Ehlers, John F.
      Rocket sciencefor traders : digital signal processing applications/ JohnF.Ehlers.
      p. cm.-(Wiley   trading)
      ISBN 0-471-40567-1 (cloth:alk. paper)                        E.   Ehlers.
  1. Investment analysis-Mathematical models. 2. Stocks-Prices-Mathematical
models. 3. Signalprocessing-Digital techniques. I. Title. II.Series.
    HG4529.E492001        techniques.     1.     Title.   II.  Series.
    332.63'2042'01154-dc21                                         2001017853
    Printed in theUnited Statesof America.                         2001017853
    l 0 9 8  7     6  5 4 3   2 1

10    987    65       43121

To Elizabeth-my friend, m y companion, m y wife.
To Elizabeth—my friend, my companion, my wife.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

    PREFACE: LIFT OFF



        A n y sufficiently advanced technologyis
        Any indistinguishable from magic.
        "Sm ARTHUR c. CLARKE
        —SIR ARTHUR C. CLARKE

  The advances madein computer technology during the past two
  decades have been dramatic. The computer power to which we
  have access today is far greater and more powerful than that
  which was available to the entire national defense system just
  30 years ago. Software for traders, however, has not kept pace.
  Most of the trading tools available todayare neither different nor
  more complex than the simple pencil-and-paper calculations
  that canbeachieved through the use of mechanical adding
  machines. True, these calculations are now madewith blinding
  speed and presented in colorful and eye-grabbing displays, but
  the power andusefulness of these procedures havenot changed.
  If anything, the relative power of the calculations has dimin-
If ished because the increasedspeed of information exchange
  and increased market capitalization have caused fundamental
  shifts in the technical character of the market. These shifts
  include increased volatility and shorter periods for the market
  swings.
      Rocket Science for Traders promises to revolutionize the art
  of trading by introducing modern digital signal processingto the
  playing field. The application of digital signal processing offers
playing field. The application of digital signal processing offers

        vii
        vii

  viii Preface
        Preface
  the advantage of viewing old problems from a new perspective.
  The new perspective gained by to
        digital signal processing has led
  the birth and developmentof some profoundly effective new trad
  ing tools.The advances in new trading tools, along
        with thecon-
  tinuing advancements in hardware capabilities, virtually ensure
  the continued application of digitalsignalprocessing inthe
  future. The trader whomasters the fundamental concepts of digi-
  tal signal processing, therefore, will find great advantage when
  approaching the volatile market of the twenty-first century.
      A brief introductory chapter is followed by Chapter 2, in
  which the philosophical basesforTrendModesandCycle
  Modes are established through a look at solutions to a con-
  strained version of the Random Walk problem. Specific indica-
  tors that target each of these modes are developed later in the
  book. Chapters 3 and 4 include observations about conventional
  technical analysis tools, with special attention given to some of
  their common pitfalls.
      The basis of efficient digital signal processing i s the use of
  complex arithmetic for all computations. Since complex vari-
  ables are often completely foreign to most traders, a brief review
  and introduction to phasors are provided in Chapter 5. The com-
  mon waveforms with which everyone is familiar are calledana-
  lytic waveforms. These are converted into complex variables
  using the Hilbert Transform, as described in Chapter 6. The abil-
  ity of the Hilbert Transform to meet the
        requirements of traders
  means little if the system is notused alongside a measurement
  of the market cycle. Several differentalgorithms for cyclemeas-
of urement are therefore described and comparedin Chapter 7.
      The Homodyne Discriminator proves itself
        to be the preferred
   algorithm and is
        thus used throughout the remainder of the book.
   Chapters 8 through 12 develop unique indicators from the com-
  plex variable waveforms.
        These include the Signal-to-Noise Ratio
   (which indicates when trading should be avoided),the Sinewave
   Indicator (which anticipates Cycle Mode turning points without
   creating false whipsaw signalsin the Trend Mode), an Instanta-
   neous Trendline, andthe logic to automatically ascertain the cur-
   rent t r a m mode of the market. These conceptsare then
   combined to form a profitable automatic trading system.
combined to form a profitable automatic trading system.

        Preface ix
      The use of digital signal processing fortrading almost always
   involves the employment of filters. Digital filter transfer re-
   sponses aremost efficiently described using
        Z Transforms, which
   are described in Chapter 13. The most common Finite Impulse
   Response(FIR) and Infinite Impulse Response(IIR) filters are
   described in Chapters 14 and 15, including equations to com-
   pute filters on the fly, as well as tabulated coefficients formore
   static applications. More specialized filters are described in the
   following chapters. These include smoothing filters that have
   the lag removed(Chapter 16)and a unique MESA Adaptive Mov-
   ing Average ( " A ) (Chapter 17).We introduce the Ehlers fil-
   ter, one of the most flexible nonlinear filters available, and one
   that has the potential to be a true market model (Chapter 18).
      The use of Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT)is often advocated
   by those who ignore mathematical constraints as a way to meas-
by ure the market spectra. Chapter 19 is dedicated to explaining
   why traders should avoid FFTs in market analysis. This chapter
   alone will save the reader money by illustrating that FFTs are
   inappropriate tools for trading. Novel and unique concepts are
   presented in thefollowing chapters. The theoretically optimum
   predictive filter is described and defined in terms of the phasor
   diagram.
      This concept produces a movingaverage with no lagand
   thus has an ability to generate trading signals that are very close
   to each turning point in the market. When filtering alone is
to inadequate to isolate the signals fromthe noise, unique displays
   enable visual interpretation that is well outside the bandwidth
   of electronic filters. The procedure to plot the signal phasor is
of provided forjust this purpose.
      RocketScience for Traders concludes with approaches to
   make conventional indicators, such as the RSI, Stochastic, and
   CCI, adaptive to current market conditions rather than using
   static parameters. Specific methods are given for these indica-
   tors. Additionally, the general concepts presented for these can
   be extendedto apply to any existing static indicator.
be Many of the Qgital signal processing techniques described in
   this book have been
        known for many years and used
        in the
        phys-
   ical sciences. The Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis (MESA
ical sciences. The Maximum Entropy Spectral Analysis (MESA}

 X Preface
x Preface
 algorithm wasoriginallydeveloped by geophysicists in their
 exploration for oil. Thesmallamount of data from seismic
 exploration demanded a solution using a short amount of data. I
 successfully adapted this approach and popularized it for the
 measurement of market cycles. More recently,the use of digital
 signal processinghas exploded in consumer electronics, making
 devices such as CDs and DVDs possible. Today, complete radio
 receivers are constructed without the use of analog components.
 As we expandits use by introducing it to thefield of trading, we
 see that digital signal processing is an exciting new field, perfect
 for technically oriented traders. It allows us to generalize and
 expand the use of many traditional indicators, as well as achieve
 more precise computations. My objective is to expose you to
 these techniques to make your trading more profitable and more
 pleasurable.
    Traders who have never studied mathematics or who have
 let their math skills
        languish may find some of the concepts pre-
 sented to be foreign and difficult to grasp at the first reading.
 Since many of the concepts are interrelated, a deeper under-
 standing may come from rereadingthis book severaltimes.
standing may come from rereading this book JOHN F. EHLERS
 Santa Barbara, California E. EHLERS
 lune 2001 California
June 2001

    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


  I would like toacknowledge the impact that Dr. Carl Jelinekhad
  on my approach, resulting from ourmany technical discussions.
  Dr. Jelinekhas enabled me tobetter understand how the dynam-
  ics of the probability density function of market pricespro-
  foundly affect our trading modes. As a result, I have attempted
  to implement approaches that best capture profitable trading
  conditions. I would also like to acknowledge the contributions
  of Donald H. Kraska, whose rigorousattention to detail kept me
  honest in some of my more arm-wavingderivations. Most of all,
  I would like to acknowledge the support of my customers who
1 made my research possible and for the encouragement of my
  colleagues. possible and for the encouragement of my
colleagues. J. F. E.










    xi
    xi

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CONTENTS


Chapter 1      Introduction to the Scienceof Digital
Analysis           Signal to the Science of Digital    1
Chapter 2      Market Modes        1                    7

Averages
Chapter 3      Moving                                   17
Chapter 4      Momentum Functions                       33

Variables
Chapter    5   Complex   Functions                      41
Chapter 6      Hilbert Transforms                      51

                    Periods                            63
Chapter 7      Measuring Cycle

Chapter 8      Signal-to-NoiseRatio                     77

Chapter 7      The Sinewave Indicator                   75

                The        Trendline                   107
Chapter 10 Instantaneous

Chapter 11      Identifying Market Modes               113
Chapter 12      Designing a Profitable Trading System  117
 Chapter 13     Transform Arithmetic     System        131
 Chapter 14     Finite Impulse Response Filters        143

                        Impulse    Response Filters    151
 Chapter 15     Infinite

 Chapter 16     Removing Lag Response Filters          167
  Chapter 16       Removing Lag        167
                    xiii
                    xiii

 xiv
xiv                       Contents
 Chapter 17   MAMA-TheMother     of Adaptive
Chapter 17    Moving Averages     Adaptive            177
 Chapter 18   Ehlers Filters                          185

 Chapter 19   Measuring
                          Market
                              Spectra                 197

 Chapter 20   OptimumPredictiveFilters                205

 Chapter 21   What You SeeIs What You Get             215

 Chapter 22   Making Standard IndicatorsAdaptive      227
Chapter 22    Epilogue        Indicators Adaptive     239

              For More Information                    240

              Glossary                                241

              Index                                   245
     Index                    245

        Chapter 1

        INTRODUCTION TO
        THE SCIENCE OF
        DIGITAL SIGNAL ANALYSIS

        Computers are worthless.
        They can only give you answers.
        They can only give "PABLO PICASSO
        —PABLO PICASSO

  Make no mistake about it. This is a book for traders about digi-
  tal signalprocessing. It is not
        a book for engineersabout tradmg.
  At first glance, the reverse mayseem to be true for many traders
  because the subject matter is on the cutting edge of technology
  and the mathematics behind this technology can be more ad-
  vanced than thatencountered in school. Recognizingthat many
  traders want to simply use the technology rather than become
  schooled in it, the information in this book is aimed at several
  levels. We provide the rationale, derive the equations, and pro-
  vide the computer code to implementthe techniques. With this
  approach, ourresults can be used in applications ranging froma
  cookie-cutter indicator operating within Tradestation or Super-
  Charts to the applications that are springboards for still more
  advanced technology.
      It is common for technical analysis indicators to be described
  in terms of a fixed period of time. For example, the standard
  length used for a Relative Strength Indicator (RSI)is the last 14
length used for a Relative Strength Indicator (RSI) is the last 14

        1
        1

2
 price bars.One often hears about a five-day Stochasticor a 10/30-
 day moving average system. Since the market is continuously
 changing, there is absolutely no reason to use static periods in
 your indicators. Choosing the correct time period is essential to
 using traditional indicators to their maximum potential. While
 deriving the tools with which to makeindicators adaptive, you
 will see novel indicators that surpass the traditional ones in
 accuracy and performance.
     Digital signal processing is an exciting new field fortechni-
 cally oriented traders. Many of the indicators that have been
 used previously can now be generalized, and the computations
 can now be accomplished
        more precisely using digital methods.
 It isinteresting to notethat many of the digital signal processing
 techniques I describe have been
        known for many years and used
 in thephysical sciences. My objective is to expose you to these
 techniques to makeyour trading more profitable and more plea-
 surable.
     Many physicalsystems involve the use of analog signalsthat
 are represented as continuous time functions. There is an ampli-
  tude associated with the signal at each instant in time. There is
 an infinite number of amplitude values that the signalmay
 assume. However, if the signal is frequency bandlimited, there
 is no significant energy abovethe cutoff frequency. Since energy
 is required in any physical system to change amplitude, this im-
 plies that the signal cannot change amplitude instantaneously.
 Therefore, points closelyspaced in time will have relatively
 similar amplitudes. There are several waysin which a signal can
 be represented other than as a continuous analog signal. One
 method is to quantize the amplitude and hold that value until
 the next quantization is performed. There are a finite number of
 amplitudes, but the function is continuous in time. This is in
  contrast to a discrete time signal, which has continuous ampli-
 tude values but is only defined at lscreteinstants in time. As
 with analog signals, there is an infinite number of levels, but
  there are only a finite number of points in time. If a signal is
  quantized in both amplitude and time, it is called a digital sig-
 nal. The data we deal with in trading are digital signals from
  sampling that is done in uniform periods of time (onceper day,
  once per hour,etc.). in uniform periods of time (once per day,
once per hour, etc.).

                                  Introduction to the Science of Digital Signal Analysis  3
     Introduction to the Science of
                                A discrete time signal can beobtained from an analog signal
                           by multiplying it by a periodic impulse train. The sampling sig-
     nal can be expressedin the time
                                   domain as The sampling sig-
    nal can be expressed in the  1
     s ( t ) =                     6(t- kT)

  where 6 = the impulse function
where § T = period between impulses
  Using Fourier theory,multiplication in thefrequency domainis
  synonymous with convolution in the time domain. In other
  words, multiplying signals in the time domain is the same as
  heterodyning, or mixing, the signals in the frequency domain.
  The impulse train has an infinite number of harmonics at fre-
  quencies that are the reciprocal of the period between pulses.
      The effects of sampling in the frequency domain are illus-
  trated in Figure 1.1. The continuous bandlimited signal F ( f J is
  shown in the top segment (a) as having a frequency rolloff at
  some point. In the middle segment (b),the sampling impulse
  waveform S(fJhas a monochromatic spectral line at the sam-
  pling frequency fₛ and all its harmonics. When the sampling is
  performed on the bandlimited signal, the convolved waveform
  is shown in the bottom segment (c).Not only is the original band-
is limited continuous signal present, butthis same signalalso
  appears as the upper and lower sidebandsof each sampling fre-
  quency harmonic. Since the lowersideband of the sampling
  frequency can extend into theoriginal baseband, the bandlimit-
  ing must occur belowhalf the samplingfrequency. Half the sam-
  pling frequency is called the Nyquist frequency because the
  Nyquist Sampling Theorem states that there must be at least
  two samples per cycleof the signal to avoid aliasing.
      Aliasing is a form of distortion. It results from sampling a
  continuous signal lessthan twice per cycle. This distortion can
  be seen in the two waveforms depicted in Figure 1.2. Both the
  upper trace and the lower trace have identical sampling points,
   denoted by the dots. The samples in the top trace appear to be
  valid. However, these same samples plot out the sine wave of
   the lower trace,where there are foursamples per cycle.The dif-
 the lower trace, where there are four samples per cycle. The dif-

    4    Rocket Science forTraders
    4    Rocket Science for Traders








        EG)
        (b)

        fg EA

        CATA
        *
        Figure 1.1. Sampled data in the frequency domain.
        Figure 1.1. Sampled data in the frequency domain.

ference is explained byaliasing in thetop trace. The samples are
taken at three-quarters of a cycle apart, or two samples every
 one-and-a-half cycles.This does not meet the Nyquist criterion
of at least two samples per cycle.
    In trading, we can scale all timeframes to each bar. Each bar
is a sample. Therefore, to meet the Nyquist criterion, the ab-
 solute shortestcycle wecan consider is a 2-bar cycle.As a prac-
 tical matter, 5- and &bar cycles
        should be consideredthe shortest
 useful cycles.
    If the input signal is insufficiently bandlimited, the aliased
 frequency components are folded back into the sampled base-
 band as falsesignalsand noise. For this reason, data should
 always be smoothed before any other operation is performed.
 Otherwise, the undesired signal components will have an ad-
 verseeffect on your computations. Smoothing removes the
 high-frequency components, precluding these components from
 being folded backinto theanalysis bandwidth. from
being folded back into the analysis bandwidth.

    Introduction to the Science of Digital Signal Analysis 5
    Introduction to the Science of Digital Signal Analysis 5






    I     I
    l     I




        L I

        Figure 1.2. Signals must be sampled at least twice per cycle.
      Figure 1.2. Signals must be sampled at least twice per cycle.
      The complex waveshapes that describe traders’ charts can
   be considered as synthesized from more primitive waveshapes,
be adding or subtracting from each other depending on their rela-
   tive phases. These kinds of waves are called coherent, meaning
   the amplitude at any given position can be determined by a vec-
   tor addition of the amplitudes. The waveshapes are analogous to
   voltage in electric circuits. When we measure the strength of
   the signals, we prefernot to use the amplitude of the wave as a
   measure because it is dependent on the location, orphase,
   within the wave.Rather,power is the preferred measure of
   strength. Power is proportional to waveform amplitude squared,
   just as the power a 100-Wlightbulb consumes from a 115-V cir-
   cuitis proportional to the voltagesquared. In digitalsignal
   analysis, we are mostly concerned with relative power, or power
   ratios. It is convenient to express these power ratios in terms of
   decibels.
      As an historical aside, one decibel was the power lost in a
   telephone signal over one mile of wire (the name was derived
   from Alexander Graham Bell). A decibel is one-tenth of a bel.
   The bel is the logarithm base 10of the power ratio. Thus, a deci-
   bel is 10*L0g10(P2/P1),
        and is abbreviated as dB. Working with
bel is and is abbreviated as dB. Working with

 6 Rocket Science for Traders
6
 decibels simplifies understanding signallevels both because
 large power ratios are compressed into a smaller range of num-
 bers due to thelogarithm and because adding decibels (i.e., add-
 ing logarithms)is easier than carrying out multiplicationin your
 head. For example, 2*2 = 4 can also be performed with loga-
  rithms: Log(2)= 0.3, so that Log(2)+ Log(2)= 0.6, which is Log(4).
 Memorizing some key ratios makes the identification of relative
  power instantly recognizable. A power ratio of 2 translates to +3
  dB. If that ratio is ?4rather than 2, then it translates to -3 dB.
  That is, the reciprocal of the power ratio is the same absolute
  value of decibels, but the sign is reversed. A ratio smaller than 1
  (but necessarily greater than 0) is always expressed in negative
  decibels. If we double the power, that is 3 dB. If we double it
  again so that thepower is 4 times the original, that is6 dB. Dou-
  bling still again to get 8 times the original power, we add
        another
  3 dB to reach a level of 9 dB. Since we have a logarithm base 10,
  a power ratio of 10is 10d B , and a power ratio of 100is 20 dB, and

a so on. Consider this to further illustrate the use of decibel: If a
  filter has half the power coming out of it as was entered, the out-
  put power is -3 dB.The filter is said to have a 3-dBloss. If a sim-
  ilar filter is placed at the output
        of the first, the net output
        power
  from the composite circuit would be-G dB.
     The measurement -3 dB is usually a critical point for a filter.
  This half-power point in the filter response occurs when the
  wave amplitude is 0.7 relative to itsmaximum value. This is true
  because 0.7*0.7= 0.5, the half-power ratio. The critical point in
  the filter is often called the cutoff frequency because frequency
  components beyond the cutofffrequency are attenuated to a
  greater degree and frequencycomponents within thecutoff fre-
  quency are attenuated very little. To simplify, think of the filter
  as having a stone-wall response. In this analogy,frequencies
  below the cutoff frequency are not attenuated and frequencies
  above the cutoff frequency are not allowed to pass through the
  filter.
     EasyLanguage is currently the most popular computer lan-
  guage for traders. Thus, I use this system to generate computer
  codes. EasyLanguage is a dialect of Pascal, containing special-
  ized keywords unique to trading. Because it reads almost like
 ized keywords unique to trading. Because it reads almost like

        Introduction to the Science of Digital Signal Analysis           7
        Introduction to the Science of
           English, EasyLanguage is almost effortless to understand. It is
            also easy to translate to other computer languages. Whentrans-
             lating, the reference convention must be understood.The Easy-
                Language assumption is that all computations are done with
            reference to thecurrent bar. For example, Closemeans the clos-
       ing priceof the current bar. If there is a reference associatedwith
          that parameter, it is displayed in square brackets and means the
       number of bars back to which it refers. For example, Close[3]
       refers to theclosing price3 bars ago.Zero can be used as
                                                                  a refer-
              ence, andhas the same meaning as the current bar without any
       reference (there is no reference into the future).     As a further
                      example, a two-day momentum is written as Momentum =
       Close - Close[2];. Each completed
                                             line of code must terminatein
       a semicolon. For clarity, I always write out the generic descrip-

a tion of an action rather than relying on a more esoteric Trade-
  Station function call. As a result, the computer code presented
  should be easily translated to BASIC,C+, oreven an Excel
  spreadsheet. translated to BASIC, C++, or even an Excel
spreadsheet.
        Key Points to Remember

        This book can be readat several levels, ranging from
                                                                   a broad
        perspective overviewto detailed computer coding.
                  Novel andunique indicators are made possibleby the math-
        ematical techniques to be introduced.
    *   Even conventional indicator performance can be enhanced
        by making them adaptive to current market conditions.
    *   Time scales of financial data can be dealt with on a per-bar
              basis. The absolute time scale of the data is irrelevant for
        computational purposes.
        Workmg with sampled data is distinctly different fromwork-
    *   ing with continuous information. Sampled data should al-
        ways be smoothed to avoid erratic signals. data should al-

       ways be smoothed to avoid erratic signals.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

        Chapter2
        Chapter 2

        MARKET MODES

        Chaos often breedslife,when order breedshabit.
        Chaos often breeds life, " H E N R Y BROOKSh m s
        —HENRY BROOKS ADAMS

 The whole point of technical analysis is tofind a way to exploit
  the inefficiency of the market for gain. The general objective
  of the market is to provide accurate prices for asset allocation.
  That is, investors can choosestrategies that allow prices to fully
  reflect all available information at any time. Such a market (a
  market in which prices always fully reflect available informa-
  tion) is called efficient. Much research has been done to prove
  that themarket is indeed efficient. However,the fact that there
  exists a number of traders who are continuously successful is
  adequate proof that markets are not necessarily completely effi-
  cient. The failure of the efficiency hypothesis in several casesis
  sufficient evidence to invalidate the hypothesis itself.
     Classical efficient market models are often concerned with
  the adjustment of security prices to three information subsets.
  Weak form tests comprise the first subset, in which we are sim-
  ply given the historical prices. The second subset is semistrong
  form tests that concern themselves with whether prices effi-
  ciently adjust to other publiclyavailable information. Strong
  form tests, the third subset, areconcerned with whether in-
  vestors have monopolistic access to any information relevant to
  price formation. The generalconclusion, particularly for the
  weak form tests, is that themarkets can beonly marginally prof-
  itable to a trader. In fact, onlythe strong form tests are viewed as
itable to a trader. In fact, only the strong form tests are viewed as

        9
        9

     10         Rocket Science for Traders
10
  benchmarks against deviations from market efficiency. These
  strong form tests point to activities such as insider trading and
  the market-making function of specialists.
     The efficient-markets-model statement that the price fully
  reflectsavailable information implies that successiveprice
  changes are independent of one another. In addition, it has usu-
  ally been assumed that successive changes are identically dis-
  tributed. Together, these two hypotheses constitute the Random
  Walk Model, which says thatthe conditional and marginal
  probability distributions of an independent random variable are
  identical. In addition, it says that the probability density func-
  tion mustbe the same for all time. Thismodel is clearly flawed.
  If the mean return is constant over time, then the return
        is inde-
  pendent of any information available at a given time.
     I assume that there is an adequate number of traders in-
  volved in making the market thata statistical analysis involving
  a Random Walkis appropriate.There must be severalconstraints

a to such a Random Walk. The first constraint is that the prices
  be constrained to one dimension-they can only go up or down.
  The second constraint is that time must progress monoton-
  ically.
     I have formed myphilosophical basis of market action from
  extensive work using constrained Random Walks in the physi-
  cal sciences.’The expression of such a Random Walk is thatof a
  drunkard moving ona one-dimensional array of regularly spaced
  points. At regularintervals, the drunkard flips a coin and makes
  one step to the right or left, depending on the outcome of the
  coin toss. At the end of n steps, he can be at any one of 2n + 1
  sites, and the probability that he is at
        any site can be calculated.
  Let the distance between the points on the lattice be U,and let
  thetime between successive steps be AT If AL and AT are
  allowed to shrink to zero in such a way that (Uj2/ATremains
  constant to thediffusion constant D, then theequation govern-
  ing the distribution of the displacement of the Random Walker
     from his starting point is    of the Random Walker
    from his        is
     ‘Weiss, G. H., and R. J. Rubin. “Random Walks: Theory and Selected
     Applications.” Advances in Chemical Physics 52 [ 1982):363-505.
    Applications.” Advances in Chemical Physics 52 (1982): 363-505.

                                Market Modes                          11
                            Market Modes           11

                                      &P
     This rather famous partial differential equation is called the Dif-
                                               can be interpreted in two
     fusion Equation. The function P(x,t)
     ways. It can either be taken toexpress the probability density or
     the concentration of diffusing matter at position x at timet. Fol-
     lowing the latter interpretation, it can, for example, describe
                                                                     the
     way heat flows up the stem of a silver spoon when placed in a
     hot cup of coffee.
               To better understand the theory of diffusion, imagine the
     way a smoke plume leaves a smokestack. Think about how the
     smoke rises compared to how a trend carries itself through
     the market. A gentle breeze determines the angle to which the
     smoke, or trend, is bent. The widening of the smoke plume
     represents the probability density of the smoke particles as a
     function of distance from the smokestack. This widening is anal-
     ogous to the decreased accuracyof the prediction of future trend
     prices further into thefuture.
                  The formulation of the Drunkard's Walk has no property
     that can be regarded asthe analog of momentum. A more realis-
     tic model of a physicalobject's         motion needs to account for
     some form of memory-we        need to know where the object came
     from and the likelihood it will continue to move in the same
     direction. The simplest modification of the Random Walk is to
     allow the coin toss to determine the persistence of motion. In
     other words, with probability p         the drunkard makes his next
     step in the same direction as the last one, and with probability
     l-p         he makes a move in the opposite direction. The ordinary
     Drunkard's Walk occurs when p = !h,because either move is
     equally likely. The interesting feature of the modified Drunk-
     ard's Walkis that as the distance between the point and the time
     between steps decreases, one no longer obtains the Diffusion
     Equation, but rather the following equation:      the Diffusion
    Equation, but rather   S2P     1 SP         S2P
                           -+""-c2-
                           6t
                           6t2
                            T                   6x2
  in one dimension, where T and c2 are constants. This isanother
  famous partial differential equation called the Telegrapher's
famous partial differential equation called the Telegrapher’s

  12 Rocket Science for Traders
12 Rocket Science for Traders
  Equation. This equation expresses the idea that diffusion occurs
  in restricted regions, such that x2 c c2t2.That is, the position
  must be less than the velocity of propagation c multiplied by
  time t. More important, the Telegrapher’sEquationdescribes
  the harmonic motion of P(x,t)just as surely as it describes the
  electric wave traveling down a pair of wires.
      Harmonic motion is ubiquitous. It is the natural response to
  a disturbance on any scale ranging fromthe atomic to the galac-
a tic. You can demonstrate the effect by holding a ruler over the
  edge of a table, bending the ruler down, and then releasing it.
  The resulting vibration is harmonic motion. Alternatively, you
  can stretch a rubber band between your fingers, pull the band
  to one side, and then release it. The oscillations of the rubber
  band alsoconstitute harmonic motion. Since there are plenty of
  opportunities for market disturbances, it is only a small stretch
  to extend the solution to the Drunkard’s Walk problem from
  physical phenomena and use it to describe the action of the
  market.
      The Drunkard’s Walk solution can describetwo market con-
  ditions. In the first condition, the probability is evenly divided
  between stepping to theright or the left, resulting in theTkend
  Mode, which is described bythe Diffusion Equation.The second
  condition, the probability of motion direction is skewed, results
  inthe Cycle Mode,which is described bythe Telegrapher’s Equa-
  tion. The difference between the two conditions can be assim-
  ple as the question that the majority of traders constantly ask
  themselves. If the question is “I wonder if the market will go up
  or down?” then the probability of market movement is about
        if
  50-50,establishing the conditions for a Trend Mode. However,
  the question is posed as “Will the trend continue?” then the
  conditions are such that theTelegrapher’s Equation applies.
        As a
  result, the Cycle Modeof the market can beestablished.
      The Telegrapher’s Equation solution also describes the me-
  andering of a river. Viewed as an aerial photograph, every river
  in the world meanders. This meandering is not due to a lack
  of homogeneity in the soil, but to the conservation of energy.
  (Youcan appreciatethat soil homogeneity is not a factor because
  other streams, such as ocean currents, also meander in a nearly
other streams, such as ocean currents, also meander in a nearly

        Market Modes 13
        Market Modes 13
 homogeneous medium.) Ocean currents are not nearly as visible
 as rivers and are, therefore, not as familiar to most of us. Every
 meander in a river is independent of other meanders, and are all
 thus completely random. If we were to look at all the meanders
 as an ensemble, overlaying one on top of the other like a mul-
 tiple exposure photograph,the meander randomness would also
 become apparent. The composite envelope of the river paths
 would be about the same as the cross section of the smoke
 plume. However, if we are in a given meander,we are virtually
 certain of the general path of the river fora short distance down-
 stream. The result is that theriver can be described as havinga
 short-term coherency but a randomness over the longer span.
    River meanders are like the cycles we have in the market.
 We can measure and use these short-term cycles to our advan-
 tage if we realizethey can come andgo in thelonger term.
     We can extend our analogy to understand when short-term
 cycles occur. Rivers meander in an attempt to maintain a con-
 stant slope on their way to the ocean. If the slope is too severe,
 the meander has the same effect as a skier who weaves back and
 forth across a slope to slow the descent. The flow of a river phys-
 ically adjusts itself forthe purpose of energy conservation. If the
 water speeds up,the width of the river decreases to yield a con-
 stant flow volume. The faster flow contains more kinetic
 energy, andthe river attempts to slow it down by changing direc-
 tion. At the same time, the river direction cannot change
 abruptly because of the momentum of the water’s flow. Mean-
 dering results. Thus, meanders causethe river to takethe path of
 least resistance in the sense of energy conservation. We should
 think of markets in thesame way. Time must progress assurely
 as the river must flow to the ocean. Overbought and oversold
 conditions result from attempts to conserve the energy of the
 market. This particular energy arises from the fear and greed of
  traders.
     Again, it may be useful to test the principle of energy con-
  servation for yourself. Tear a strip about 1 inch wide along the
  side of a standard sheet of paper about 11 inches long.Grasp
  each endof this stripbetween the thumband forefingerof each
  hand. Now move your hands toward one another. Your com-
hand. Now move your hands toward one another. Your com-

          14     Rocket Science for Traders
    14        Rocket Science for Traders
  pression is putting energy into thisstrip, and its natural response
  can take one of four modes.These modes are determined by the
  boundary conditions that you force. If both hands are pointing
  up, the response is asingle upward arc, approximating
        one alter-
  nation of a sine wave. If both hands are pointing down, the
  response is a downward arc. If either hand is pointing up and
  the other pointing down, the strip response to the energy input
  is approximately a full sine wave. These four lowest modes are
is the naturalresponses followingthe principle of conservation of
  energy. You can introduce additional bends in the strip, but a
  minor jiggling will cause the paper to snap to one of the four
  lowest modes, with the exact mode dependingon the boundary
  conditions that you impose. The two full sinewave modes are
  approximately the second harmonic of the two single alterna-
  tion modes.
      The market only has a single dominant cycle most of the
  time. When multiple cycles aresimultaneously present, they are
  generally harmonically related. This is not to say that nonhar-
  monic simultaneous cycles cannot exist-just that they are rare
  enough to be discounted in simplified modelsof market action.
  The general observation of a single dominant cycle tends to
  support the notion that the natural response to adisturbance is
  monotonic harmonic motion.
      It is true thatif you are a hammer, the rest of the world looks
  like a nail. We must take care to recognize that allmarket action
  is not strictlydescribed by cyclesalone and that cycle tools are
is not always appropriate. A more complete model of the market
   can be achieved by knowing
        that there are times when the solu-
   tion to the Telegrapher’s Equation prevails and times when the
   solution to the Diffusion Equation applies. We can, therefore,
   divide the market action into aCycle Mode anda Trend Mode.
   By having only two modes in our market model, we can switch
   our trading strategy backand forth between them, using the
   more appropriate tool according to our situation. Since our digi-
   tal signal processingtools analyze cycles, we canestablish that
   a Trend Mode is more appropriate at any given time due to the
a failure of a Cycle Mode.
      There are many ways to analyze the market using technical
   analysis.Regarding indicators, the preferred tools are moving
 analysis. Regarding indicators, the preferred tools are moving

        Market Modes 15

        Market Modes 15
  averages ordata smoothers for Trend Modes andoscillator-type
  indicators for Cycle Modes. In later chapters, we develop supe-
  rior indicators for both market modes. Atthis point, it is impor-
  tant to understand that the two modes of a simplified market
  model have beendirectly derived from solutions to the Drunk-
  ard’s Walk problem. Keep asking yourself, “Will the market go
  up or downtoday?” and “I wonder if the trend will continue?”

up or down today?” and “I wonder if the trend will continue?”
        Key Points to Remember

     A simplified model of the market has a Trend Mode and a
     Cycle Mode. and
     The market model is similar to a meandering river. a
® Both the Trend Mode and the Cycle Mode are derived from
     the Drunkard’s Walk.
     Different technical indicators are appropriate for each mar-
« ket mode. indicators are appropriate for each mar-
    ket mode.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

    Chapter 3

    MOVING AVERAGES

          nend i s not destiny.
    “LEWIS MUMFORD
             —LEwWIS MUMFORD

    Centuries ago Karl Friedrich Gauss proved that the average is
    the best estimator of the random variable. He derived
                                                         the famil-
    iar bell-shaped probability density curve known as the Gauss-
    ian,or Normal, distribution.When the probability distribution
    of a random variable is unknown, the Gaussian distribution is
    generally assumed.In this bell-shaped curve,the peak value, or
    the mean, is the nominal forecast. The width of the variation
    from the mean is described in terms of the variance. It is cer-
    tainly true that theaverage is thebest estimator for the market
    in thecase where the Diffusion Equation(as described in Chap-
    ter 2) applies. The best estimate of the location of any smoke
    particle is the average across the width of the plume. This is
    probably why moving averages are heavily used by      technical
traders-they want the best estimate of the random variable.
    All moving averages have two characteristics in common:
They smooth the data and cause lag because they depend on
historical information for computation. By far the most serious
implication for traders is theinduced lag. Lagdelays any buying
or selling decision and is almost always a bad characteristic.
Therefore,averaging is typically a trade-off between the
amount of desired smoothing and the amount of lag that can be
tolerated.
    There are three popular typesof moving averages.These are
  There are three popular types of moving averages. These are

        17
        17

       18                 Rocket Science for Traders
   18        Rocket Science for Traders
       1. Simple Moving Average (SMA)
   1. 2. Weighted Moving Average (WMA)
       3.    Exponential Moving Average (EMA)
   3.  Each of these types of averages has its own respective merit,
       and there are times when any one of the three is the appropriate
       choice. The discussions in this chapter describe eachof the three
          moving averagesso you canmake the comparisons for yourown
       applications. so you can make the comparisons for your own
   applications.
                            Simple Moving Average

 An n-day simple average is formed by adding the prices of a secu-
 rity over n days and dividing byn. Thus, the weighted pricefor
 eachday is the realpricedivided byn. The simple average
 becomes a moving average by adding the next day’s weighted
 price to thesum and droppingoff the weighted first day’s price.
 Thus, the simple average moves from day to day. This is the
 most efficient wayto compute a Simple Moving Average (SMA).
     Another way to view an SMA is as an average of the data
 within a window. In this concept, the window slides acrossthe
 chart, forming the moving average from barto bar, as shown in
 Figure 3.1. Figure 3.1 shows a 10-bar window and the moving
  average formed by this window. The average is plotted at the
 right-hand side of the window, causing the moving average lag.
 This is necessary because the window cannot accept data into
  the future. So, when a moving average is used in actual trading,
  the lag cannot be overcome.Centeringthe moving average on
       the
  window is not helpful for trading becausefuture data would be
  required to get the current value of the average. Obviously,future
  data arenot available for the last bar onthe chart.
     The staticlag of an SMA can be computed as a function of
  the window width. Consider the following case wherethe data
  have a price of zero at the left edge of the window. The price
  increases by one unit for each subsequent bar, as shown in Fig-
  ure 3.2. The average priceis always the price at thecenter of the
  window, expressed mathematically at (n- 1)/2.The average is
window, expressed mathematically at (n — 1)/2. The average is

    Moving Averages    19









    1

    l





    !






       Figure 3.1. A moving averageaverages data within a moving
       window. a moving
        Chart mated with Tr&Station200Oi@ by OmegaResearch,Inc.

      Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.
 plotted at the right-hand side of the window. Since the price
  slope is unity (rises vertically one unit for each unit increase
  along the horizontal),the averaged priceat theright-hand side of
  the window is effectively lagging the price at the center of the
  window by (n- 1)/2bars. This lag is simply unavoidable. An
  example of a 5-bar window averageis shown in Figure 3.2. It is
  clear in thisexample that thelag is two units, equal to (5 - 1)/2.
  As a trader, youmust make a trade-off by choosingbetween the
  amount of smoothing you want from your moving averageand
  the amount of lag you cantolerate.
     A thorough understanding of the impact of moving average
  lag is absolutely crucial for successful trading.On the one hand,
  a wide averaging window providesa very smooth moving aver-

a wide averaging window provides a very smooth moving aver-

  20    Rocket Science for Traders




      10
      9
      3
      7
      3
      5
      4
      3
      2
      1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0
      0
  1  2 3           4        5   6   7 8     9 10

     Figure 3.2.       Computing the SMA lag.
     Figure 3.2.   Computing the SMA lag.

  age. However, such a moving average is so sluggish in response
  that it may only be useful in working with the longest trends. A
  narrow averaging window, on the other hand, does not provide
  much smoothing, so the average may be highly responsive but
  canproducewhipsawsignals     due to inadequate smoothing.
Approaching a moving average from the perspective of the fre-
quency domain rather than from the time domain can thus be
useful and instructive.
     Assume the data comprise a theoretical sine wave as shown
in Figure 3.3. We can arrange our averaging window to be any
width wechoose. Thewidth of Window A in Figure 3.3 is
 exactly one half cycle. If the window were narrower, then the
 average would not include all the data points in the positive
 alternation of the sine wave, andthe average wouldtherefore be
less sensitive. If the window were wider than a half cycle, the
 average would contain some negative data points as well as all
 the data points in the positive alternation. Thus, the average
 would also be less sensitive. Figure 3.3 shows the half-period
 moving average of a sine wave. The peak value of this moving
 average occursat theright-hand side of Window A because Win-

  average occurs at the right-hand side of Window A because Win-

  dow A contains only the positive data points in the sine wave.
  As we move the window tothe right, the movingaverage
  decreases in amplitude. Reaching Window B, the moving aver-
  age is zero at the right-hand edge because Window B contains
  exactly as many negative data points as positive data points,
  causing the average to sum to
        zero. Continuing to move the win-
  dow to theright, we arrive at Window C.The moving averageat
  Window C is maximum negative because Window C contains
  only negative data points. The moving averageis created byslid-
  ing the window acrossthe entire data set.
     Note that the half-period SMA of a sine wave is another
  sinusoid (waves that look like sine waves), delayed bya quarter
  cycle. Drawing from our previous knowledge of the lag of an
  SMA, we can assert that the lag is half the window width,
  expressed in fractions of a cycle period orin degrees of phase. A
  quarter-cycleSMA will lag the price by an eighth of a cycle. This
  is the equivalent of saying that if the averaging window i s 90
  degrees wide,the resulting SMA lag will be 45 degrees.
     When the market is in a Cycle Mode,it is more important to
  think in terms of the phase shift an SMA will induce rather than
  in terms of the number of bars of lag that it will cause. For exam-
  ple, a 2-barlag is almost inconsequential for a 40-bar
ple, a 2-bar lagI inconsequential for a 40-bar cycle.
        cycle.



    8    -
    I:



    L -1    I


    Figure 3.3. Half-cycle SMA of a sine wave.
    Figure 3.3. Half-cycle SMA of a sine wave.

 22 Rocket Science for Traders

 However, this same 2-bar lag is a full quarter-of-a-cycle phase
 shift for an 8-barcycle. In trading, it is important to always
 consider the phases in relative terms, particularly when deal-
 ing with shorter cycles. For this reason, it is often preferable
 to continuously adapt an SMA window to be a fraction of the
 measured market cycle rather than using a fixed windowwidth.
 This adaptation enables the SMA to provide the same reac-
 tion toprice movement regardless of the timeperiod of the dom-
 inant cycle.
     If we increase the window width to include a full cycle, as
  shown in Figure 3.4, we have a very interesting case for the
  SMA. Examination of Figure 3.4 shows that in a pure cycle,
  when the window width is exactly one cycle, there are as many
  data points above the mean as there are belowit. Therefore, the
  SMA is exactly zero forthis special case.We use this phenome-
  non later to create the Instantaneous Trendline after we have
  measured the dominant cycle. By adjusting the average to have a
  window whose width is exactly the measured dominant cycle,
  we cancelout thedominant cycle completely. Sinceour simpli-
  fied market model consists of a Trend Mode component and a
  Cycle Mode component, we are left with only the Trend Mode
  component after the dominant cycle component has been re-
component after the dominant cycle component has been re-


    Window D










    Figure 3.4. The average of a full-cycleSMA is zero.
    Figure 3.4. The average of a full-cycle SMA is zero.

  moved. The Instantaneous Trendline differs from an SMA only
  in therespect that thewindow width can vary from barto bar.
  Since the window width is always a full cycle period for this
  indicator, the lag of the Instantaneous Trendline is a half period
  of the dominant cycle.
     The SMA is also identically zero fora pure sine wave when
  the window width is exactly an integer number of cycles wide.
  This can be seen in Figure 3.5, in which the window width is12
  bars. Figure3.5 is attained by changing the frequency appliedto
  the fixed 12-bar-wide window.
        The results are plotted after being
  normalized to the Nyquist frequency, which is exactly half the
  sampling frequency. For example, if the data being used consist
  of daily bars, then the Nyquist frequency is 0.5 bars per day.
  Since the cycle period andthe cycle frequencyare inversely pro-
  portional, the period of the Nyquist frequency is 2 bars. The
  periods of those components that have an integer number of
  cycles within the 12-bar windowhave been noted in Figure 3.5.
     The SMA window can be viewed asa transfer function that
  multiplies the data falling within the window by 1 and multi-
  plies all data outside the window by 0. This transfer response is
  a pulse in the timedomain. Functions in the timedomain are
a related to functions in the frequencydomainby the Fourier
  Transform, as discussed in Chapter 1. A derivation of Fourier
  Transforms is beyond the scope of this book, but is covered in
Transforms is beyond the scope of this book, but is covered in




    h    P=3!






  Figure 3.5. Thetransferresponseofa12-bar SMA.
Figure 3.5. The transfer response of a 12-bar SMA.

          24
    24        Rocket Science for Traders
          many fine texts. Without the derivation, I assert that theFourier
          Transform of the pulse in the time
              domain is that the Fourier
    Transform of SMA(Period)= Sin(n*W/P)/(n*W/P)
          where W = width of the SMA window W/P)
where W P = period of the cycle being averaged
  The SMA is expressed in terms of wave amplitude. This mathe-
   matical equation for the frequency domain response of an SMA
   exactly describes the function shown in Figure 3.5, except that
   the figure is plotted in decibels rather than wave amplitude.
   Each time theratio of the window width to the
        cycle periodis an
   integer, the argument of the sine function is a multiple of Pi.
   Since the sine is exactly zero for arguments in multiples of Pi,
   the transfer responsehas nulls for these cycle periods.
      Figure 3.5 shows that low-frequency components (longer
   cycles)are allowed to pass through the SMA with only a small
   amount of attenuation, or size reduction. However,high-
   frequency components (shorter cycles) are greatly attenuated,
   even between the nullpoints. For this reason, an SMA falls into
   the category of low-pass filters. Low-pass filtering is exactly
   what is desired from a data smoother. The smoothing comes
   about as a result of reducing the size of,or attenuating, the
   amplitude of the higher-frequency components within the data.
      The frequency description of an SMA does not have a null at
   zero frequency. At zero frequency,its period is infinite because
   cycle period is the reciprocal of frequency. Therefore, although
   the numerator goes to zero at zero frequency, the denominator
   also goes to zero. In the limit, the ratio of the numerator to the
   denominator is unity (avalue of 1).We have previously assigned
   some significance to the cycle period that is twice the window
   width (or more precisely, where the window width was half the
   cycle period).In this case, the numerator in theSMA frequency
   description rises to become unity and the denominator is 42.
   The cycle period that istwice the widthof the SMA window is
   a workable and easy-to-remember demarcation between those
 a cycle periods that have small attenuation and those that have
 cycle periods that have small attenuation and those that have

        25
  greater attenuation. For example, an SMA window width of 8
  bars would allowthose cycle components of 16 bars and longer
  to pass nearly unattenuated and would attenuate cycle compo-
  nents whose periodsare shorter than 16 bars.
     We now havethe tools to thinkabout SMAs in both the time
  and frequency domains.We know that the8-bar SMA has a lag
  of 3.5 bars fortrends. This same SMA gives a 16-bar cyclea 90-
  degree phase delay and An
        a 32-bar cyclea 45-degree phase delay.
  8-bar cycle component is removed completely. This ability to
  think of the impact of averages in both the time and frequency
  domains will greatly improve your probability of success as a
  trader. will greatly improve your probability of success as a
trader.
        Weighted Moving Average

  A WeightedMovingAverage(WMA) is closely related to an
A SMA. The major difference is the coefficients of the multiplier
  for the WMA are not constant across the window width. Rather,
  the coefficients are linearly weighted acrossthe window. There-
  fore, it follows that theoldest data point is multiplied by 1, the
  next oldest data point is multiplied by 2, the third oldest data
  point is multiplied by 3, and so on until the most recent data
  point is multiplied by n for an n-bar window width. The sumof
  the data and coefficient products is divided by the sum of the
  coefficients to normalize the averaging process. A 4-bar WMA
  code can bewritten as the averaging A 4-bar WMA
code WMA = (4*Price+ 3*Price[l]+ 3*Price[2]+ Price[3])/10;

      The transfer response of the 4-bar WMA is shown in Figure
  3.6. Since the data are weighted acrossthe window width, there
  can be no precise averaging to zero as there was with an SMA.
  Nevertheless, the WMA is also a low-pass filter.The point where
  the filter attenuation is 3 dB acts as our point of demarcation
  between the passband andthe stopband. I
        nFigure 3.6,this occurs
  at a normalized frequency
        of 0.25, correspondingto an 8-bar cycle.
  Cycles longerthan roughly 8 bars are passed essentiallyunatten-
Cycles longer than roughly 8 bars are passed essentially unatten-

    26    Rocket Science for Traders


    1
    !





        Normalized Frequency (Nyquist == 1)

        Figure 3.6. Frequency response of a 4-bar WMA.
        Figure 3.6. Frequency response of a 4-bar WMA.
  uated, and cyclesshorter than 8 bars are reducedin amplitude to
  provide the smoothing.
      As with SMAs, smoothing of WMAs is improved by increas-
  ing the width of the window. For example, the transfer response
  of a 7-bar WMA is shown in Figure 3.7. In this case, the -3 dB
of point occurs at a normalized frequency of about 0.14, which is a
  period of approximately 14 bars. Since the passband is linearly
  related to the window width, the passband of a WMA is also
  twice its window width, as a reasonable approximation.
      A WMA offers a major advantage because
        it exhibits reduced
  lag in its transfer response. The reduced lag results from the
lag in its transfer response. The reduced lag results from the










    Figure 3.7. Frequency response of a 7-bar WMA.
    Figure 3.7. Frequency response ofa 7-bar WMA.

     Averages Moving        27

most recent data being the most heavily weighted.The amount
of lag induced by an SMA or a WMA is the center of gravity of
the transfer response. Inthe case of the SMA, the center of grav-
ity is at the
     center of the filter, resulting in a lag of ( n- 1)/2for
an n-bar window width. The shape of the WMA coefficients
forms a triangle across the width of the filter, resulting in the
center of gravity beinga triangle, one-third of the distance across
the window. Thus, the lag of an n-bar WMA is ( n- 1)/3.There-
fore, in our examples, a 4-bar WMA has a lag of only 1 bar and a
7-bar WMA has a lag of only 2 bars.
    The weighting functions for a WMA do not necessarily have
to be linear across the width of the window. The linear weight-
ing is nonetheless very simple to compute, and the impact of lin-
ear weighting is easy to remember by recalling the center of
gravity of a triangle. Furthermore, the impact of other weighting
distributions is too subtle for trading purposes. Therefore,
                                                        there
is no compelling reason to use any weighting factor other than
linear.

             Exponential MovingAverage

The moving averages discussedthus far are nonrecursive. That
is, previous calculations are unnecessary to compute the cur-
rent value of the moving average.An Exponential Moving Aver
age (EMA) is different in a major way because it is recursive.
The calculations use a fraction of the current price added to
another fraction of the EMA calculation 1 barago.   The first
fraction is usually called alpha (a)
                 and can have a value between
0 and 1. The two fractions must sum to unity, so the second
fraction must have the value of 1 - a.The equation to compute
 an EMA is

             EMA = a*Price+ (1- a)*EMA[l];

 The EMA becomes a moving average by moving from bar
                                                            to bar,
 from left to right, across the price data.
           The termexponential describes the way an EMA transfer re
 sponse decays in amplitude relative to a single input. Imagine a

          28         Rocket Science for Traders
    28           Rocket Science for Traders
          case in which the data set has an amplitude of l/aat one bar and
          an amplitude of 0 everywhere else. Whenthe EMA is applied to
          this data, the first output from the filter is unity because there
          was no previous
                 value for the EMA. On subsequent calculations,
          the price valueis 0, and so the sequence ofcalculations is
    the price value is EMA(0)=the sequence of calculations is
                     1
                EMA(1)= (1- a)
                EMA(2)= (1- a)*(1
                EMA(3)= (1-   - a)= (1- a)'
                     a)'*(l- a)= (1-


        EMA(n)= (1- a).

      Since the quantity (1
        - a)must be less than 1, the amplitude
  decays as the exponent of each succeeding calculation from an
  impulse input. Hence the name Exponential. In principle, a part
  of any data input remains in subsequent calculations although
of the contribution becomesvanishingly small. Thisattribute
  makes an EMA part of a general class of filters called Infinite
  Impulse Response (IIR) filters. IIR filters are distinct from the
  Finite Impulse Response(FIR) filters, the class to which the
   SMA and WMA belong. With FIR filters, the filter provides an
   output only so long as the impulse falls within the window.
  Thus, in thiscase, the response to an impulse is finite.
      It is instructive to examine the EMA response to a step func-
   tion. A step function has a series of constant values and then
   jumps to another series of constant values. Assume the price has
   been 0 for a long time and then suddenly jumps up to a value of
   1 and maintains that value thereafter. On the first bar, the EMA
1 will have a value of a.On the second bar, the value will be a +
   a*(
      1 - a).On the third bar, the value will be a + a*(
        1- a)+ a*
   (1- a)', and so on. The EMA will gradually approachthe value of
   1. A common error in programming is to insert a value for a,
   such as 0.2, and insert another number for (1- a),
1. The two terms must sum to unity such as 0.9.
        or the recursive algorithm
   will lead to erratic results or might even causeyour computer to
   crash. You should always check your computer code to ensure
crash. You should always check your computer code to ensure

         Averages Moving                                         29

  the two terms sum tounity. Iam so cautious on this point that
  I assign the value a as a global variable andwrite out the EMA
1 equation in terms of a.By letting the computer do the work, I
  know the two terms mustsum correctly.
     We can easily derivethe lag of an EMA for the case of price
  that rises linearly at the rate of one unit per bar. Recalling the
  form of the E M A calculation, one unit per bar. Recalling the
    form of the   E M A = a*Price+ (1- a)*EMA[l];

       We can assert that the price on day d is d. If we assume the
     lag of the EMA is L, then thecurrent value of the EMA is (d- L).
     Furthermore, the previous E M A would have a value of (d - L -
     l),since price is rising one unit per bar.Putting these values into
     the equation for the EMA, we obtain Putting these values into
    the ( d - L ) = a * d + ( l - a ) * ( d - L - 1 )
                  = a * d + ( d - L ) - 1 - a * d + a * ( L + l )
                O = a * ( L + l ) - 1
                a = 1/(L + 1)

     This equation shows that we can select an acceptable lag, and
     from that lag, compute the alpha term of the EMA. For example,
     if we can accepta 3-bar lag resulting from the EMA, we would
     use a = 0.25.
          We can also relate an EMA to an SMA on the basis of their
     equivalent static lags. Recalling that the lag of an SMA is (n -
     1)/2for an n-bar SMA, we can substitute this value of lag into
     the alpha calculation of the EMA as     this value of lag into
    the alpha calculation of a = l/((n- 1)/2+ 1)
                  = 2/((n- 1)+ 2)
                  = 2/(n + 1)

  This isthe relationship between an n-bar SMA and the alpha of
  an EMA that is quoted in most technical analysis books.
      A 12-bar SMA was used to compute the transfer response
  shown in Figure 3.5. The equivalent alpha for an E M A is a =
shown in Figure 3.5. The equivalent alpha for an EMA is a =

    30    Rocket Science for Traders
    30    Rocket Science for Traders







        -25
        Normalized Frequency
        (Nyquist =,+) . , ,,'

   Figure 3.8. Transfer response of an EMA with delayequal to that of a 12-
   bar SMA. Transfer response of an EMA with delay equal to that of a 12-
  bar SMA.

K 3 = 0.1538. The EMA transfer response forthis value of alpha is
shown in Figure 3.8. Comparing Figures 3.8and 3.5, it is obvi-
ous that the EMA normalized frequency passband ismuch
smaller than thepassband of the SMA. Therefore, an EMA pro-
vides much more smoothing than an SMA for an equivalent
amount of lag. Alternatively, you can conclude that an EMA
has much less lag than an SMA for an equivalent amount of
smoothing.
    It is also interesting to compare a WMA to an EMA on the
basis of equivalent lag. The WMA that produced the transfer
response depictedin Figure 3.7 had a lag of 2 bars. For a 2-bar lag,
 an EMA has a = 0.3333. The transfer response of the EMA is
 shown in Figure 3.9. In this case, the EMA response is nearly
equivalent to the response of the WMA shown in Figure 3.7,
 with the WMA providing slightly better filtering. Furthermore,
 the WMA attenuates those components within the passband a
 little less than theEMA for these same components.
    We do not yet have the tools to compute the cycle period of
 the passband demarcation in the frequency domain in terms of
 the alpha of the EMA, but we canassert without proof that this
 relationship is EMA, but we can assert without proof that this
relationship is P = -2n;/ln (l - a)

        Moving Averages 31
        Moving Averages 31
F!






    !


      Figure 3.9. Transfer responseof an EMA with delay equal to that of a 7-
      bar WMA.  Transfer response of an EMA with delay equal to that of a 7-
     bar WMA.
     where In is the natural logarithm. This relationship is proved in
     Chapter 13. Computation of the natural logarithm maybe
     unnatural to most traders, so we simplify the equation with a
     little mathematical slight of hand. We can approximate the nat-
     ural logarithm with a truncated infinite series because (1 - a)
     will always be lessthan unityas series    because  1 —
    will always In (1- a)= -a - az/2- a3/3- a4/4. . .-an/n

  If a is sufficiently small, we can ignore all but the first two
If terms of the series. Substituting the truncated series for the nat-
  ural logarithm in thepassband periodcalculation, we obtain
    ural logarithm in the  P = 2n/(a+ a2/2)    we obtain
          P     = 4n/(a*(2+ a))
          + a)
          Key Points to Remember

     Regardless of their formulation, the purpose of moving averages
     is to smooth
          the     inputdata. Their use is a trade-off between the
    is amount of smoothing you desire andthe amountof lag youcan
    amount of smoothing you desire and the amount of lag you can

  32 Rocket Science for Traders
32 Rocket Science for Traders

stand. The characteristics of the most popular moving aver-
ages SMA
      Lag is (n - 1)/2.
      Passband periodis 2*n.
      Phase lagis a linear function of window width.
      WMA is a linear function of window width.
      Lag is (n- 1)/3.
      Passband periodis 2*n.
      Gives the best filtering for a given amount of lag.
      Phase lagis a linear function of window width.
      EMA is a linear function of window width.
      a = 1/(Lag+ 1).
      a = 2/(n + 1)when comparedto anSMA.
      The a and (1- a)terms mustalways sum tounity.
      Passband periodis -2x/ln( 1 - a)= 4n/(a*(2+ a)).
      Phase lagis nonlinear due to recursion. +
    Phase lag is nonlinear due to recursion.

        Chapter 4

        MOMENTUM FUNCTIONS

        Backward, turn backward,
        oh timein your flight. . .
        oh “ELIZABETH AKERS ALLEN
        —ELIZABETH AKERS ALLEN

  I can’t beginto tell you the number of traders that has asked me
I to make their signals happen just one bar sooner. The typical
  question is “Can’t you just take a momentum?” In the most
  simple case, momentum is just the l-bar difference in price.
  Momentum is deceiving becauseit can give the illusion of antic-
  ipating turning points. h fact, there are cases in which some
  form of a momentum can increase the reaction time of an indi-
  cator. Even experienced technicians get lured into investigations
  in which advancing the indicator signal is impossible. For this
  reason, it is instructive to return tobasics andthoroughly inves-
  tigate the properties of momentum functions.
      In the most general sense,momentum functions simply take
  the difference of successive values to sense the rate of change.
  Just as the sums forming the averages are analogousto integrals
  in the calculus, momentum is analogous to derivatives in the
  calculus. The impact of momentum can be appreciatedby tak-
  ing successive momentums as we doin Figure 4.1.
      In Figure 4.1, we analyze the successive momentums of a
  simple ramp function. The ramp is described as having a zero
  slope before an instant in timeT and then breaking to a finite
  slope at that instant. This isa relatively smooth function. The
  first momentum of the ramp is a step. There is no change in the
  slope of the ramp before or after time T, so the step function is
slope of the ramp before or after time T, so the step function is
        33
        33

    34    Rocket Science for Traders
    34    Rocket Science for Traders


              RAMP                                    FUNCTION
              ~~     FUNCTION
          STEP        t     derhrathre                2nd
                                                      (Acceleration)
              JERK                                    3rdderhrative
          JERK                             3rd derivative
          Figure 4.1. Successive application of momentum shows that
          momentum can never anticipate an event. Also,  momentum
          functions become increasinglydiscontinuous. momentum

  formed by instantly jumping froman initialslope of zero to the
  finite value of the slope of the ramp. Taking the momentum of
  the step function, there is no change except the instantaneous
  jump fromone value to another at time?: This forms an impulse.
  An impulse is a mathematical artifice that has infinite height
  and zerowidth in such a way that thearea ofthis “rectangle” is
  unity. Put simply, an impulse is a spike at time T Next, taking
  the momentum of the impulse, we obtain a jerk. The jerk is
  formed by a two-step process. A positive impulse part of the jerk
  is first formed by traversing the leading edge of the impulse
is function. This is followed by the formation of the negative
  impulse part, which is due to traversing the trailing edge of the
  impulse function.
      Examination of Figure 4.1 identifies two undeniable truths .
   about momentum functions. These are undeniable truths
   1. Momentum can never lead the event.
1. 2. Momentum is always more disjoint (i.e., noisier) than the
    2.   original function. more disjoint (i.e., noisier) than the
        These truths are obvious when removed fromthe distractions of
        a price chart. There must be a reason why traders expect
                                                               momen-
         chart. There must be a reason why traders expect momen-

        Momentum Functions
  tum to increase the pe~formance
        of their indicators. That reason
  is demonstrated in Figure 4.2, where the momentum of a pure
  sine wave is taken. Since momentum is the rate of change of a
  function, the momentum of the sine wave is maximum at the
function, the igure 4.2 where the sine wave crosses zero. The
        ecreases as the sine wave increases. It reaches zero
  at the point where the sine wave crests. The slope of the sine
at ve at this point is zero, causing the momentum to be zero.
wave at this to the right, the slope of the sine wave increases in
Continuing to direction, causing the momentum to reach its neg-
the negative m just as the sine wave again crosses zero. The
ative maximum traced out by the dashed line in Figure 4.2. This
        s the characteristic that it reaches a crest 90 de-
  grees before the sine wave crests and reaches a valley 90 degrees
  before the sine wave does.
     If the price were a sine wave, it would be easy to conclude
  that moment~mis a leading indicator. But this is true only
  when the market is in a Cycle Mode. It is, therefore, imperative
  to first identify the mode of the market before assigning a lead-
  ing indicator capability to the momentum. In Chapter 1 1,meth-
  ods to identify market modes are discussed.
        have already stated that momentum is analogous to a
  derivative in the calculus. ~e can use this fact to analyze the
derivative in the calculus. We can use this fact to analyze the




    |

   N
     \    J       \
   SE
        \    J     \    J


    |

     . ~ o ~ e n t u ~
       leads a pure sine wave by 90 degrees.
    Figure 4.2. Momentum leads a pure sine wave by 90 degrees.

          36    Rocket Science for Traders
    36        Rocket Science for Traders
          behavior of momentum in thefrequency domain. From any cal-
          culus text, the derivative of a sine wave havingthe angular fre-
          quency a is derivative of a sine wave having the angular fre-
    quency o is       d(Sin(at))/dt
              = a*Cos(at)

      This equation shows that the derivative of a sine wave does
  lead the sine wave by 90 degrees because the result is exactly a
  cosine wave, like the dashed momentum shown in Figure 4.2.
  The equation also shows that amplitude is directly proportional
  to frequency. The amplitude is omega (a),
        which is 2*z*fre-
  quency. We expect the same phenomenon in trading. If we take
  the simple difference (momentum)of a 2-bar cycle that varies
  between +l and -1, the difference will be the crest-to-valley
  value, or 2. Conversely, if we have a 50-bar cycle swinging be-
  tween +l and -1, thenthe maximum momentum will be
   approximately %S = 0.08. There is no momentum for extremely
  long cycles becausethere is essentially no rate of change that is
  useful fortrading. The frequencyresponse of a simple l-bar
   momentum is shown in Figure 4.3.
      Figure 4.3 shows that a zero frequency signalis almost com-
  pletely rejected by the filter. Shorter frequencies are rejected
   less. For example, a 10-bar cycle signal has a normalized fre-
   quency of 2/Period = %O = 0.2, andis only attenuated by about 10
   dB. A 4-bar cycle signal (% = 0.5 normalized frequency)is only
dB. A 4-bar cycle signal (% = 0.5 normalized frequency) is only










          Figure 4.3. Frequency response of a simple momentum.
          Figure 4.3. Frequency response of a simple momentum.

     Momentum Functions                                      37

attenuated by about 3 dB. Since very-low-frequency
                                                     components
are rejected and higher-frequency
                               components are passed, Figure
4.3 suggests that momentum can be used asa detrending filter.
However, the passband is too narrow to be of practical benefit.
As you recall from Chapter 3, the half-power point, or -3    dB
point, is the accepted practical cutoff frequency. According to
this definition, only cycles with periods of 4 bars or less would
be pass. We can flatten thefrequency responseby malung the fil-
ter wider. However, in making the filter wider we alsoincrease
the lag. As with an SMA, the lag through an n-bar momentum is
Lag = (n- 1)/2.Therefore, there isa l-bar lag fora 3-bar momen-
tum (Lag= (3- 1)/2=212 = 1). The
                                     3-bar momentum is computed
from the equation:
     = 1). The 3-bar momentum is computed
from the    MO= 0.5*Price- OS*Price[2];

   The frequency responseof this filter is shown in Figure 4.4.
There are two clear benefits from this filter, as opposed to the
simple momentum filter of Figure 4.3. First, the frequency re-
sponse of the filter is much flatter. For example, the attenuation
at thenormalized frequency of 0.1 (a20-bar cycle)is only -10 dB
instead of the approximate -17 dB in Figure 4.3. Second, the 2-
bar cycle (normalized frequency = 1) is nearly completely sup-
pressed. The 2-bar cycle is always suppressedif the order of the
symmetrical filter is odd.     suppressed if the order of the
symmetrical filter is odd.
 P
 !i                                               !i
 l
                                                  1


      !
      !        Normalized Frequency (Nyquist == 1)    I

Figure 4.4. A 3-bar detrending filter has flatter frequency response and
rejects the 2-bar cycle.    filter has flatter frequency response and
rejects    the 2-bar cycle.

    38    Rocket Science for Traders
    38    Rocket Science for Traders










    Figure 4.5. A 5-bar momentum removes both 2- and 4-bar cycle com-
    ponents. A 5-bar momentum removes both 2- and 4-bar cycle com-
      If a little bitis good, a whole lot more is better-maybe. We
  can attempt to flatten the frequency response by using a 5-bar
  momentum. Theequation becomes by using a 5-bar
momentum. The MO= OS*Price- OS*Price[4];

      The frequency response forthis 5-bar momentum is shown
  in Figure 4.5. Unfortunately, we have introduced another fre-
  quency notch at a 4-bar cycle.Once we stop and think about it,
  we see that thismakes sense because subtracting data from a 4-
  bar cycle 4 bars ago will exactly cancel any output from the
  high-pass filter.
      The frequency notching exhibited in Figure 4.5 can beelim-
  inated by making the filter have symmetrical coefficients. For
  example, if we write the equation as coefficients. For
example, if MO= 0.0909*Price+ 0.4545*Price[l]
        Mo = + 0 - 0.4545*Price[3]- 0.0909*Price[4];
  we then get the high-pass frequency response shown in Figure
  4.6. We have quickly reached the point of diminishing returns
  for this approach. For example, the attenuation for the 20-bar
   cycle slipped from-5 dB in Figure 4.5 to about -8 dB in Figure
   4.6. In addition, the lag from the high-pass filter is 3 bars. The
4.6. In addition, the lag from the high-pass filter is 3 bars. The

Functions
       Momentum 39
     Momentum Functions 39










    Figure4.6. A 5-bar high-pass filter smoothes passband frequency re-
    sponse. A 5-bar high-pass filter smoothes passband frequency re-
     advantage of the 90-degreephaseleaddue     to differencing is
     quickly lost due to the lag. The total phase lag as a function of
     cycle perioddue to the &bar lag can be
                           written as     function of
    cycle period Phase lag= 360*3/Period -90 degrees

     By setting the phase lagto zero, we find that the shortest cycle
     period having no phase lag i s a 12-bar period. Longer cycleswill
     have a phase lead. Since we need to work with cycle periods
     even shorter than 12 bars, there is no point in attempting to
     make the differencing havea wider passband becauseadditional
     lag will be induced. Thus, we have reached ourpoint of dimin-
     ishing returns. Further amplitude corrections must be accom-
     plished by measuring the dominant cycle and then applying a
     correction term for that cycle.
     It is interesting to take the momentum of an SMA. To clarify
     this point, we refer to prices fromthe current time as A, B, C, D,
     and E. A 4-bar SMA of the prices is current time as A, B, C, D,
    and E. A 4-bar SMA S M A = ( A + B + C + D ) / 4

     and the 4-bar SMA of the prices 1bar ago is
    and the 4-bar SMA  SMA[l]= (B + C + D + E)/4
                                           +E}/4
                                   SMA[1]=(B+C+D

  40 Rocket Science for Traders
40 Rocket Science for Traders
  When wetake the difference of the two moving averages, we get
When we take the SMA - SMA[l]= (A- E)/4 we get

  The interesting conclusion here is that the momentum of a
  4-bar SMA is exactly the same as a 4-bar momentum within
  a constant factor of the averaging. This specific conclusion can
a be extended to any length SMA.
be By the same token, an SMA of four momentums arrives at
  the same conclusion. Consider this relationship: arrives at
the same conclusion. Consider this relationship:


        It all boils downto thesame thing. An n-bar average of momen-
    It  tums is exactly the same as an n-bar momentum. of momen-
    tums is exactly the same as an n-bar momentum.
              Key Points to Remember

          Momentum can never leadthe event.
    *     Momentum is always noisier than theoriginal function.
    *     Momentum can producea 90-degree phase leadin theCycle
    *     Mode.
          Improving momentum quickly reaches a point of diminish-
    *     ing returns.
          Amplitude compensationof momentum can be accomplished
    *     by measuring the dominant cycle and applyinga correction
         by for that cycle period.
          The momentum of an n-bar SMA is the same as an n-bar
    *     momentum.   of an n-bar SMA is the same as an n-bar
         momentum.

    Chapter 5

    COMPLEX VARIABLES

Numbers are like people; torture them enough
      and they willtell you anything.
    and they will tell you -ANONYMOUS
                           —ANONYMOUS

  The mathematical concept of complex variablesis introduced in
  this chapter to lay the groundwork for the derivation of indica-
  tors that are either impossible without complex variables or
        that
  would requireenormous computational overhead without them.
  Mastering complex variables
        will give you greatinsight into the
  way market action can be described, and can even suggest new
  indicators.
     Since you are reading this book, you are undoubtedly com-
  fortable with our number system. However, there are some
  primitive societies that have no words fornumbers larger than
  10, other than an equivalent to “many,” because they run outof
  fingers onwhich to count. Even more surprising is thefact that
  the concept of zero is a relatively modern invention. If you stop
  and think about it, “nothing” inthe physicalworld is an
  abstract concept, so why would one need a word to describe it?
  There was no zero in Roman numerals. I
        n fact, the concept of
  zero wasnot introduced to the Western worlduntil theRenais-
  sance when Leonard0 de Pisa(1170-1240) (alsocalled Fibonacci)
  wrote Liber abaci. Somewhat later, the idea of negative numbers
  was introduced. If zero is an abstract concept, how could one
  possibly have less than nothing? Clearly, this objection to the
  number system existed beforethe days of margin calls.Today, it
  is accepted that the numbering system can be viewed as a con-
is accepted that the numbering system can be viewed as a con-
        41
        41

  42 Rocket Science for Traders
42 Rocket Science for Traders
  tinuum of real numbers ranging from minus infinity to plus in-
  finity along a straight line.
      There is no reason whynumbers must be confinedto a line.
  We can conceive of numbers as existing in a plane. Following
   this concept, any position on that plane can be described by an
   orderedpair of real numbers. The first number of the pair
   denotes the number of units along the horizontal dimension,
   and the second number of the pair denotes the number of units
   along the vertical dimension. But describing a position in a plane
   is rather clumsy. Also, a need for complex numbers arises in
is algebra fromthe impossibility of finding the square roots of neg-
   ative quantities. The clumsy situation has to be avoided, and we
   do this by the invention of the imaginary unit and we
do this by the invention of the imaginary unit


      i b )formed fromthe two real numbers a and b, and the imag-
  (a +We can then define a complex number as a combination of
(a inary unit i. The imaginary unit i not only has the value of the
  square root of -1, but also serves as a rotation operator. Thus,
  the point on the plane denoted by (a + i b ) is a units along the
  horizontal and b units along the vertical. I
        n this structure, the
  imaginary operator reorients a real number from the horizontal
  axis to the vertical, acting as the rotation operator. The two
  components a and i b arecalled the realand the imaginary,
  respectively, of the complex number. Numbers along the verti-
  cal dimension are often called imaginary numbers. This is an
  unfortunate name choice, forthis number is no more imaginary
  than other numbers. Imaginary numbers is just an assigned
  name, like rational numbers or prime numbers. What is impor-
  tant is that theuse of complex numbers ensures that a polyno-
  mial of any order with real coefficientscanbefactored into
        ' + bx + c cannot
   complex roots. For example, the polynomial x
  be factoredinto real roots if c > b2.
      Electrical engineeringuses the symbol i to denote electrical
   current. Therefore, it is common practice to use the symbol j to
   denote the complex operator to avoid confusion with electrical
   current. We follow that practice in thisbook. It is also common
   to refer to the horizontal dimension as x and the vertical dimen-
to refer to the horizontal dimension as x and the vertical dimen-

    Complex Variables    43





              j2

              1

    3 2 1 0     -jl 2 3

                -j2
             —-j2

        -j3
        Figure 5.1. Real and imaginarynumbers in the
        complex plane. and imaginary numbers in the
        complex plane.
  sion as y, so the complex number z is understood to be z =x + jy.
  The real and complex numbers forming the complex plane are
  depicted in Figure 5.1.
      Arithmetic can be easily performedin thecomplex plane.If
  you adda real number to another real number, the result is a real
  number that is the sum of the two real numbers. If you add
  an imaginary number to another imaginary number, the result
  is an imaginary number that is the sum of the two imaginary
is numbers. However, if you add an imaginary number to a real
  number, the result is a complex number. The real numbers and
  imaginary numbers are said to be orthogonal. In this case, ortho-
  gonal not only means that thenumbers exist at right angles, but
  it also means that they are independent of each other. The most
it complicated mathematical operation occurs when a complex
  number is added to another complex number. In doing this,
  the real components are addedtogether and, independently,the
  imaginary components are added together. An example of com-
  plex addition is shown in Figure 5.2, which showsthat theaddi-
plex addition is shown in Figure 5.2, which shows that the addi-

44    Rocket Science for Traders



               ja                           (6+j4)
                           243
                             a              /
                                           /
               Ep                         /
                              /
              Jil    =        Wr     /(4+j1)
     0     1                 2    3       4   5   6 7
     0      1               2     3  Real  5      6 7

                              Real
     Figure 5.2.     Addition of two complexnumbers.

 tion of complex numbers is exactly the same operation as vector
 addition in two dimensions.
          The product of a real andan imaginary number is imaginary.
 Thus 2*j3= j6. The product of two real numbers i s real, as is the
 product of two imaginary numbers: j2*j3 = -6,        and j3*(-j4) =
 +12. The reason the product of two imaginary numbers is real is
 that theimaginary unit is also multiplied, and j 2 = -1. The mul-
 tiplication of two generalized complexnumbers is      The mul-
 ( a+ jb)*(c+ j d )= QC - bd + jad + jbc = (ac- bd)+ j(ad + bc)

             A complex number can also be expressed in polar coordi-
 nates. With referenceto Figure 5.3, the polar coordinate dimen-
 sions are r at an angle of   8. The relationships between the real
 and imaginary coordinates and
                                 the polar coordinates are real
and imaginary             a = r*Cos (e)     coordinates are
                          b = r*Sin (e)
                          r = G T P
                          8 = ArcTan(b/a)

 It is also useful to express complex numbers in exponential
 form. The exponential function is, by      definition, equal to the
 limit approached by aninfinite series:         equal     to the
limit approached by an infinite series:

    Complex Variables    45

    z = (a+jb)



                                                |

        E                                       |
        |                0     Real             i|
                             Real
                      Figure 5.3.      Components of 2.
        Figure 5.3.              Components of 2.

                                   9x3                x"
                        & = l + x + - + - +      . . . -
                                     2!  3!           n!

    This series reminds us of the series that defines the trigono-
    metric functions:    us of the series that defines the trigono-
    metric functions:      e2    e4        + (-lp -
                    COS (e)= 1- -+ -- . . .              82"
                          2!     4!                     (2n)!
        cossin (e)=e -     e3    e5     . .       an        -11
                         -+ -- .
        (6]=6-            3!     5!        -             (2n- l)!
            The sine and cosine series,
                                       although rather like theexponen-
    tial series in most other ways, havea reversal of sign of alternate
    terms. A similar reversal of sign takes place in the exponential
    series, but only if the exponent is imaginary. Considereie,which
    can be found by letting x = je in the exponential series. I n this
    case we obtain       x =     in the exponential series.    In this
        e2                 e4      . .)+(e--+--.
    case we eje= (1--+--.                         e3     e5  . . )
        e’            2! =4!_                     3!    6° 5!
        —_—
      By comparison to the series expansionsfor the sine and
   cosine functions, we can express the exponential form as and
cosine functions, we can express the exponential form as

  46                 Rocket
      eje = Cos (e)+ j                  Sin (e)

        Alternately, we can expressthe Cosine and Sinefunctions as
      Alternately, we can    eie + e+ = 2 Cos (e)     functions as
                        and  eie- e-ie = j2 Sin (e)

           This is an important theorem of complex variable theory
  known as Euler’s Theorem. Euler’s Theorem says that sines and
  cosines can be expressed in terms of an exponential function
  having animaginary operator.
      We are all familiar with the frequency of a cycle. For exam-
  ple, the power coming fromour wall plugsis an alternating cur-
  rent. The frequency of this alternating current is 60 cycles per
  second. Cyclesare repetitive. Each time a cycle is completed, it
  sweeps through 360 degrees, or 2n radians, of a sine wave. It is
  convenient to define the angular frequencyas 2n times the reg-
  ular frequency by the equation w = 27$ where o is the Greek let-
  ter omega. Usingthese definitions, ~t is thenumber of radians a
  cycle coversin a given amount of time. Since wt is an angle, we
  can represent the cycle in exponential form as ejwt,using com-
  plex notation. We thus see in Figure 5.4 that a pure cycle of an
  analytic waveform in the time domain can be represented as a
  projection onto either the real or imaginary axis.    as a
  projection onto either the real or imaginary axis.




                                        i

       E                               ||
           ot                Real       |
      Real
Figure 5.4. Exponentialcomplex frequency and
       its components.           complex frequency and
  its  components.

        Variables Complex 47
        Variables 47
     The concept of the exponential form is an extremely impor-
  tant one for the digital signal processing of trading waveforms.
  The waveformweobserveon the charts is called an analytic
  waveform. If we can break the analytic waveform into its two
  orthogonal components,we can immediately findthe amplitude
  of the cycle. By examination of Figure 5.4 and usingthe F'ythago-
  rean Theorem, we can see
        that the square of the real component
  plus the square of the imaginary component is equal to r2, the
  square of the cycle amplitude. Thus, we have a bar-by-bar meas-
  urement of the amplitude of the cycle in thetime domain. Such
  a highly responsive measurement
        of signal amplitude is an impor-
a tant component of all effective trading indicatorsand systems.
     The exponential form alsogives us a particularly simple way
  to measure the period of the market cycle. The cycle period meas-
  urement approach can be understood with reference to Figure
  5.5. The initialmeasurement is made at time tl so that thephase
  angle is atl.The second measurement is made at time t2,result-
  ing in the measured angle at2.The hfference between the two
  phase angles isAe. To measure the cycle period, we simply keep
  addmg all the A& until thesum equals 360 degrees. The number
  of times we haveto add the Aes is, by definition, the period of the
  cycle. We discuss exactly howto do this in Chapter 7. of the
cycle. We discuss exactly how to do this in Chapter 7.







    f=
    g
    4                 20
    E
        oly

                      oly
                         Real
        Figure 5.5.   ' h o successive phasor measurements.
    Figure 5.5.     Two successive phasor measurements.

48 for Traders
     Figures 5.4 and 5.5 are phasor diagrams. Phasor diagrams rep
  resent the cycle as a rotating vector (or, the phasor) in complex
  coordinates, where the tailof the phasor is pinned to theorigin.
  The length of the phasor represents the wave amplitude of the
  cycle. The phase angle represents a particular location within
  the cycle.
     The phasor diagrams we have been discussingonly consider
  the presence of one significant dominant cycle in thedata. Hap-
  pily, that is usually the case. The phasor diagram is therefore
  usefulforcomparing the leadand amplitude of momentum
  functions to the original data, and
        also for comparingthe lag and
  amplitude of smoothing functions to theoriginal data.
     But what if there is a secondary cycle present in the data?
  Such a cycle is very difficultto identdy because it lasts for only a
  brief amount of time and the short amount of data we are forced
  to use cannot provideenough resolution for filters. Since the
  complex variables can be added, the phasor picture might look
  something like the depiction in Figure 5.6. The dominant cycle,
  having a frequency of ol, is rotating as previously described.
        The
  secondary cycle is assumed to have a smaller amplitude and a
  higherfrequency 0 2 . When these two complexvariablesare
  added, the secondary cyclespins like a bicycle pedalat the end of
  the crank, which is analogous to the tipof the phasor of the first
the crank, which is analogous to the tip of the phasor of the first







    E        /

        o Real
        Real
    Figure 5.6 The addition of two phasors having
    different frequencies. of two phasors having
    different frequencies.

        Variables 49
  cycle. Assuming the secondary cycle is present only for a short
  while, the resultant phasor will look like the dominant cycle
  with a little whifflesuperimposed on it. These whifflesare
  immediately identifiable when the phasor is plotted. In later
  chapters, we identify these whiffles in thereal data. In later
chapters, we identify these whiffles in the real data.
        Key Points to Remember

     Complex variablesare a two-dimensional number set.
     The horizontal dimensions are called realnumbers.
     The vertical dimensions are called imaginarynumbers.
     j = fiand is the 90-degree rotation operator.
     A rotating phasor describes a pure cycle from the exponen-

     Relative phases canbe describedusing phasor diagrams.
  e A tial complex frequency.
  e Euler’s equations describe Cosines and Sinesof real frequen-
     cies as being comprisedof complex frequencies.
        a bicycle diagram.
  e Two simultaneous cycles can be depicted as
    Two simultaneous cycles can be depicted as a bicycle diagram.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

                           Chapter 6
Chapter 6

 HILBERT TRANSFORMS

    Ideas arelike rabbits.You get a couple
    and learnhow tohandle them,
    and pretty soon you have a dozen.
    and pretty soon you "JOHN STEINBECK
    —JOHN STEINBECK

This chapter contains some of the most important concepts
upon which all the following practical applications are based.
First, we derive
              the Hilbert Transform. The Hilbert Transform is
a procedure to create complex signals from
                                        the simple chart data
familiar to alltraders. Once we have
     the complex signals, we can
a compute indicators andsignals    that are more accurate and
responsive than those computed using conventional techniques.
I
n fact, some of the indicators we will discuss cannot be calcu-
lated at all without the Hilbert Transform.
    If we accept that there can be imaginary numbers,then the
concept of negative frequencies should pose no problem. If we
review trigonometric identities, we recallthat Cos(-at) = Cos(ot)
and that Sin(-ot) = -Sin(ot). These identities show that we can
easilyaccommodatenegativefrequencies.Further,       the power
contained in waveforms is proportional to the average square of
the waveform. The squaring of the sign always producesa posi-
tive power, so there can be no exception to the concept of con-
servation of power if we use negative frequencies.
 When data are sampled at a sampling frequency fs, that sam-
pling frequency acts like a radio carrier signal.That is, the real
data being sampled are heterodynedinto upper and lower side-
bands of the sampling frequency. Mathematically, heterodyning
bands of the sampling frequency. Mathematically, heterodyning
                              5 1
    51

 52 Rocket Science for Traders
52 Rocket Science for Traders
 is multiplying two frequencies (and then filtering to select the
 desired output). So, if we have a baseband data frequency offb,
 the heterodyning can be described asthe product of two signals.
 By a trigonometric identity, this product results in the sumand
 difference frequencies as this product results in the sum and
difference frequencies as

    The lowersidebandcanbeconsidered as a negativefre-
 quency relative to the sampling frequency, and the upper side-
 band can be considered as a positive frequency relative to the
 sampling frequency. Furthermore, every harmonic of the sam-
 pling frequency exists. Each harmonic also has anupperand
 lower sidebandcontaining the baseband signals.
    Since the lower sidebandof the sampling frequency exists, it
 could extend down into the baseband range of frequencies. For
 this reason, the baseband range of frequencies is limited to fJ2.
 This is called the Nyquist sampling criteria. In trading, this
 means the absolute shortest period we can use is a 2-bar cycle, or
 a frequency of 0.5 cycles per bar.The sampling frequency can be
 weekly, daily, hourly, and so on, but the shortest period we can
 consider in any time frame is a2-bar cycle.
    The sampled data spectrum can bepictured as shown in Fig-
 ure 6.1. The baseband signal is depicted as a continuum of fre-
 quencies that is bandlimited, either naturally or bya filter, to be
 less than half the sampling frequency fₛ. Several of the harmon-
 ics of the sampling frequency are also shown, along with their
 respective sidebands. Since weare talking about complex func-
 tions, the sampled spectrum can extend below zero frequency as
 well. As a result, the complete sampledfrequency spectrum
 extends from minus infinity to plus infinity, as shown in Figure
 6.2. A n interesting observation is thateither the upper or lower
 sideband of any harmonic of the sampling frequencycan be
 processed with exactly the same result because the same infor-
 mation resides in all sidebands. The frequency selection for pro-
 cessing is a matterof convenience and is, therefore,usually the
 baseband becausedemodulation of the zero frequencyharmonic
 is notrequired. demodulation of the zero frequency harmonic
 is not required.

Hilbert Transforms    53
Hilbert Transforms    53







  0                           A
  Figure 6.1.             The baseband frequency below half the samplingfrequency
  appears assidebands on harmonics of the samplingfrequency.
 appears as sidebands on  harmonics of the sampling frequency.
      The waveforms with which all traders are familiar are called
 analytic signals. Analytic signals are defined asa special caseof
 a complex function without imaginary values, that have only

a positive or only negative frequencies,but not both. We need to
 construct more general complex functions to enable more effi-
 cient signal processing. This can be done by synthesizing the
 analytic signal from a combination of two complex signalsthat
 are odd and evenfunctions around zero.
           First, we must recall the trigonometric identities Cos(cot)=
 Cos(-cot) and Sin(cot)
                                    = -Sin(-cot) and Euler’s equations:
                                                                  =
Cos(-wt) and Sin(ot) =           and   equations:
 and                      et +  = 2              Cos|wt)
 We can synthesize the analytic signal by summing the two com-
 plex signals as
                        shown in Figure 6.3.The real componentof Figure
 6.3(a)is summed with the imaginary componentin Figure 6.3(b)
 to form the complex signal shown in Figure 6.3(c).From Euler’s

to form the complex signal shown in Figure 6.3(c). From

       4                  4        4                          4
    -2fs                  -6      0    fs                     2fs

      Figure 6.2. Sampled data spectrum extends tonegative frequencies.
  Figure 6.2.             Sampled data spectrum extends to negative frequencies.

    54    Rocket Science for Traders
    54    Rocket Science for Traders





    (@)




    (b)



       (©) t=
        fo
      Figure 6.3. An analytic signal is comprised of Inphase and Quadra-
      ture components. signal is comprised of InPhase and Quadra-
    ture components.
  equations, the two complex signals can be called the Inphase
  (i.e., the Cosine) component and the Quadrature (i.e., the Sine)
  component. Quadrature means being rotated by 90 degrees.
     The Hilbert Transformer has been derived in a number of
  texts, to which you may want to refer for more information.'
  One purpose of a Hilbert Transform is tocreate a complex signal
  from an analytic signal. A Hilbert Transformer shifts all positive
  frequencies by -90 degrees and all negative frequencies by 90
  degrees.Since the frequencyresponse of sampled systems is
  periodic, we can describe the Hilbert Transformer in terms of
  angular frequency as shown in Figure 6.4 for unity amplitude
  components. Since this graph is periodic, wecan use the Fourier
  series to determine the coefficients of the exponential series
  that represents the plot. The Fourier series can be written as
that represents the plot. The Fourier series can be written as
  'Rabiner, Lawrence R., and Bernard Gold. Theory and Application of
  Digital Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffs:Prentice Hall, 1975. of
Digital Signal Processing. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, 1975.

                                Hilbert Transforms        55
                          Hilbert Transforms        55

                                        i
         -2x              R          - 0        x     x

         HE                         -1 .

     Figure6.4. Periodic frequency response of a Digital Hilbert Trans-
     former.    Periodic  frequency  response of a    Digital Hilbert Trans-
    former.

                                   H ( z )= 1C,P
                                     n=--
    If we let z = ejoTwith T = 1, the Fourier Transform becomes
If  we let z =  with T= 1, the Fourier Transform becomes

    and                             [Hie

       This equation describes the coefficients of the digital filter. Solv-
           ing the integral equation for the filter coefficients (becausethe
             square wave has the same Sin(x)/xform as the pulse described in
    Chapter 3),
                  we obtain  Sin(x)/x form as the pulse described in
Chapter 3), we obtain

                                     Sin? 62

    forn#OandC,=Oforn=O.                 n
              The value of n is relative to the center of the filter, so the
            center coefficient is always zero. The value of the sine squared
           term is always positive and has a unity value for oddvalues of n.
            The coefficients are, therefore, simply l/n for odd values of n;
          they are positive for the most recent data half of the filter; and
           they are negative in the older data half of the filter. The ideal
              Hilbert Transformer extends coefficientsfrom minus infinity to
Hilbert Transformer extends coefficients from minus infinity to

     56        Rocket Science for Traders

     plus infinity. The 2/7r factor can be ignored here because each
     coefficient is divided bythe sumof the coefficients to produce a
     normalized amplitude response. That is, the desired frequency
     components at the output of the filter should have the sample
     amplitude they had at thefilter input. We can approximate the
     Hilbert Transformer by truncating the extent. For example, we
     could truncate the filter at n   = 7. In this case, where the
     detrended Price is represented by l? the Quadrature component
     (Q)of the Hilbert Transform can be written as   component
(Q) Q = (P/7+ P[2]/5+ P[4]/3+ P[G] - P[8]- P[10]/3- P [l2115
        - P[14]/7)/(
     Q=(P/7 +        1+ 1/3 + 1/5 + 1/7); — P
     The Inphase component ( I )of the filter is referenced to theten-
     ter of the filter, and can be written simply as to the cen-
    ter of the filter, and can be written simply as

  Note that thelag of this Hilbert Transform is 9 bars.
     Since the Hilbert Transformer must be truncated, ideally it
  should be sufficiently long to capture a full cycle of the longest
  period under consideration. It is not unreasonable to want to
  process a cycle that is40-bars long.This isabout two months of
  daily data. In this case, we would
        like to truncate
        at n = 19. How-
  ever, such a Hilbert Transformer would have a lag of 21 bars.
  This lag is unacceptable because we would also want to process
  cycles with a period of 10 bars orless. The 21-bar lag would be
  more than two cycles of the data that have shorter periods.
     An alternative way to truncatethe Hilbert Transformer is to
  use as short a filter as possible.If we truncate the Hilbert Trans-
  former at n = 3, the Quadrature component can be written as
former at Q = P/3+ P[2]- P141 - P[61)/(4/3) be written as
        = 0.25*P + 0.75’P[2] - 0.75*P[4]- 0.25*P[6];

      This short Hilbert Transformer has a lag of only 3 bars. How-
  ever, the severe truncation produces the amplitude transfer
  response shown in Figure 6.5. A truncated Hilbert Transformer
  has a frequency responsesimilar to that of a momentum function.
has a frequency response similar to that of a momentum function.

    Transforms Hilbert    57

    Hilbert Transforms    57






    I  I  I




    NonnalizedRequency (Nyquist =1)


    Figure 6.5. Amplitude response of a Hilbert Transformer truncated at
    n = 3 . Amplitude response of a Hilbert Transformer truncated at
  n=3.

     The amplitude response of a minimum-length Hilbert Trans-
  former can be improved by adjusting the filter coefficients by
  trial and error.The resulting Hilbert Transformer filter equation
  is and error. The resulting Hilbert Transformer filter equation
is Q = O.O962*P + 0.5769*P[2]- 0.5769*2‘[4] - O.O962*P[6)

  The amplitude response of the Improved Hilbert Transformer i s
  shown in Figure 6.6. of the Improved Hilbert Transformer is
shown in Figure 6.6.










    Normalizedhequency (Nyquist =1)


    Figure 6.6. Amplitude response of the Improved Hilbert Transformer.
    Figure 6.6. Amplitude response of the Improved Hilbert Transformer.

 58                 Rocket Science for Traders
58
     The response of the Improved Hilbert Transformer is notdis-
 similar from the 5-bar high-pass filter described in Chapter 4
 (Figure4.6).The Improved Hilbert Transformer has a more sym-
 metrical response, but has a 3-bar lag versusthe 2-bar lagof the
 high-pass filter. Also, there is less rejection of the intermediate-
 length cycles in  theImproved Hilbert Transformer. For example,
 the attenuation for a normalized frequency of 0.1 (a20-bar cycle)
 is about -6 dB, whereas the rejection of the 5-bar high-passfilter
 was about -8 dB at this frequency. The Improved Hilbert Trans-
 former also makes a pretty good high-pass filter.
       We formed the Improved Hilbert Transformer to satisfy the
 criterion of minimizing lag. The penalty we paid forminimizing
 lag wasthe resulting amplitude taper across the frequency band
 at which we desireto operate. Sincethe Improved Hilbert Trans-
 former is so similar to a high-pass filter, and the high-pass filter
 has an amplitude rolloff directly proportional to frequency, we
 can compensate for the amplitude rolloff if we know the fre-
 quency. We do not have the frequency directly because we need
 the Inphase and Quadrature components to compute it. How-
 ever, we do know what the measured cycle period was
     l bar ago.
 Since frequencyis a slowly varyingfunction from barto bar, the
 cycle period 1bar ago can easily be used for amplitude compen-
 sation.
     If the Hilbert Transformerwere a pure differentiator, we
 know the amplitude correction term would beinversely propor-
 tional to o (seeChapter 4). Since the cycle periodis the recipro-
 cal of the frequency, the correction term would be (Periodlan;).
 When we examine Figure 6.6, wesee that we need an l1 dB cor-
 rection for a cycle period of 40 bars (normalized frequency of
 0.05) and a 6.2 dB correction for a cycle period of 20 bars (nor-
 malized frequency of 0.1). Converting these decibel values to
 amplitude and writing a straight line correction equation, we.
 have the result  a straight line   correction    equation, we.
have the  Amplitude correction = (0.075*Period[l]+ 0.54)

 This amplitude correction enables us to effectively use a mini-
   mum-length Hilbert Transformer to keep the lag to as small a
  value as possible.  Transformer to keep the lag to as small a
value as possible.

        ilbert Transform, as explained earlier, is
        adrature components from the an~lytic
        nd ~uadrature
        components enable effi-
cient computation to find the dominant cycle period, the domi-
nant cycle amplitude, and the phase of the dominant cycle.
From these parameters we can calculate unique and precise indi-
cators, such as the S i ~ ~ f f ~ - t o - ~ o i s e
        Ratio, the Sinewave Indica-
        ode predictive indicator], and an Instantaneous
        (nearly)complete code to calculate the InPhase
        components is given in Figure 6.7. (The com-
plete code requires the computation of the dominant cycle
period, which is covered in the next chapter.)
        code, all input values must be defined. In
    In ~asy~anguage
the case of Figure 6.7, the only input value is Price, and is com-
puted as the average of the High and Low for each bar in the data




    Inputs: Price ( (w+L)/2)i

    Vars: Smooth(0), Detrender(O), Il(0), Ql(0), Period(0);

If CurrentBar > 5 then begin
      Smooth = (4*Price + 3*Price[l] + 2*Price[2] +
        PriceC3I) / 10;
      Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
        .5769*Smooth[4] - .0962*Smooth[6]) *
        ( .075*Period[ll + .54);

      {Compute InPhase and Quadrature components}
      Ql = ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender[2] -
        .5769*Detrender14
        1 - .0962*Detrender[6]) *
        ( .075*Period[ll i-.54)i
      I1 = Detrenderl31 ;

          Plot1(11, "InPhase") ;
          Plot2 (-Ql, "Quadrature);

    End;

                    ~asyLa~guage
                    code.
            .7. Hilbert ~ r a ~ s f o r m

  60 Rocket Science for Traders

  series. Next, all the other variables must be defined, and their
  initial values must be set tozero. The first line of computational
  code computes the variable Smoother as a 4-bar Weighted Mov-
  ing Average (WMA)of Price. A 4-bar WMA is used to remove
  some of the higher-frequency components prior to detrending
  the Price. The lag penalty for this smoothing is only 1 bar. The
  Price is detrended in the next line of code. Since we have an
  amplitude-correctedHilbert Transformer, and since we want to
  detrend over its length, we simply use the Hilbert Transformer
  itself as the detrender. Wedo not particularly care about the
  phase of the detrended analytic signal at this point. However, we
  do note that detrending has introduced another 3 bars of lag into
  the computation. The amplitude correction can be applied after
  we compute the period of the dominant cycle. The Inphase and
  Quadrature components are contained in the next two lines of
  code. The Quadrature component is computed by applying the
  Hilbert Transformer a second time. The Inphase component is
  computed simply by using the Detrender value referenced to 3
  bars ago, the center of the Hilbert Transformer. Therefore, the
  calculation of the Inphase and Quadrature components intro-
  duces still another 3 bars of delay in the calculation. We now
  have a total of 7 bars of delay after computing the Inphase and
  Quadrature components.
     The Inphase and Quadrature components are only concerned
  with Cycle Mode signals because the Detrender removed the
  trending components. The 7-bar lagcan be convertedto a phase
  lag bythe following process:We divide the 7-bar lag bythe dom-
  inant cycle periodto get a percentage of a cycle andthen multi-
  ply by 360 degrees. Furthermore, the Hilbert Transformer offers
  the advantage of providing 90 degrees of phase lead. The equa-
  tion for phase lag is then degrees of phase lead. The equa-
tion for phase lag Phase lag= 360*7/Period - 90

  Therefore, a 28-bar dominant cycle will have zero lag. A 14-bar
  dominant cycle will have 90 degrees lag, ora quarter cycle. The
  phase lag grows rapidly for
        still shorter cycle periods.For exam-
  ple, a 7-bar cycle will have 180-degrees lag, corresponding to a
ple, a 7-bar cycle will have 180-degrees lag, corresponding to a

        Hilbert Transforms 61
        Hilbert Transforms 61
  half cycle. The phase lagof the Inphase and Quadrature compo-
  nents can be a serious consideration when interpreting the
  results of some indicators. For example, knowing the Inphase
  component is delayed by 7 bars from the time-domain wave-
  form, we can anticipate the crest of the time-domain waveform
  by projecting when the Inphase component will reach its maxi-
  mum 7 bars into thefuture. component will reach its maxi-
mum 7 bars into the future.
        Key Points to Remember

  e Both positive and negative frequencies are possible in signal
     processing.
  e only positive frequencies or only negative frequencies,but
     not both, comprise the analytic signal.
  e Complexsignals contain Inphase and Quadrature compo-
     nents.
  e An analytic signal can be synthesized by complex signals.
  e Following the preceding two points, an analytic signal can be
* decomposed into Inphase and Quadrature components.
  e A Hilbert Transformer is the technique used to decompose
      analytic signals.
  e Hilbert Transformers must be severelytruncated to produce
      acceptable lag foruse in trading.
  e Amplitude compensation of the Inphase and Quadrature
      components can be accomplished by knowing the period of
      the dominant cycle.
  e The analytic signal must be smoothed and detrended prior to
      computing the Inphase and Quadrature components.
  e The amplitude-compensated Hilbert Transformercanbe
      used to detrend the analytic waveform.
  e The phase lag of the Inphase and Quadrature components is
      (360* 7/Period - 90)degrees. Quadrature components is
    (360*7/Period — 90 degrees.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

               Chapter 7

                              MEASURING CYCLE PEEUODS
              . . . but what are we going to do with
        ...   but all those skinned cats! with
               all those    "ANONYMOUS
                   —ANONYMOUS

 One fundamental definition of a cycle is that theprocess under
 consideration has a constant rate of phase change.We can meas-
 ure the phase of a complex signal directly. Knowingthe phase at
 eachsample, we needonly take the bar-to-bardifference to
 obtain the rate of phase change. In this chapter, you are pre-
 sented with several mathematical techniques for measuring the
 period of the dominant cycle. Whilemathematically dissimilar,
 all these techniques share the common feature of using differen-
 tial phase between samples. common feature of using differen-
tial phase between samples.
        Phase Accumulation

    The Phase Accumulation technique of cycle period measure-
    ment is perhaps the easiest to comprehend. In this technique,
    we measure the phase at each sample by taking the arctangent of
    the ratio of the Quadrature component to the Inphase compo-
    nent. A delta phase is generated by taking the difference of the
    phase between successive samples. At each sample we can then
    look backward, addingup the delta phases. Whenthe sumof the
    delta phases reaches 360 degrees, we must have passed through
    one full cycle, on average. The process is repeated for each new
    sample.   on average. The process is repeated for each new
    sample.


               63

  64 Rocket Science for Traders
64
     The Phase Accumulation method of cycle measurement
  always usesone full cycle’s worth of historical data. This is both
  an advantageanddisadvantage. The advantage is the lag in
  obtaining the answer scalesdirectly with the cycle period.That
  is, the measurement of a short cycle periodhas less lagthan the
  measurement of a longer cycle period. However,the number of
  samples used in making the measurement means the averaging
  period is variable with cycle period. Longer averaging reduces
  the noise level compared to the signal. Therefore, shorter cycle
  periods necessarily havea higher output Signal-to-NoiseRatio.
     Implementing the Phase Accumulation method of cycle
  measurement with theEasyLanguage codeis described with ref-
  erence to Figure7.1. The initial part of the code creates the
  Inphase and Quadrature components, I1 and Q1,as discussed in
  the last chapter. It is crucial that I1 and Q1 besmoothed before
  the arctangent of their ratio is taken. We do the smoothing in an
  EMA whose alpha equals 0.15. The instantaneous phase (the
  phase at any bar) iscomputed as the arctangent of the ratio of Q1
  to 11. This gives the instantaneous phase within a quadrant. The
  quadrant ambiguity is removed in thesubsequent three lines of
  code. We then compute the differentialphase (Deltaphase)
  between successive samples.There can be considerable errorin
  the raw differential phase computation. To keep these large
  errors fromunduly influencing the outcome, we limit thevalues
  of the differential phase to be between cycle periods of 6 bars
  (Deltaphase= = 60) and 50 bars (Delta Phase = 3 6 0 / 5 ~= 7).The
  Deltaphases are then accumulated until thePhaseSum exceeds
  360 degrees. At that point, the cycle period is assigned as the
  number of samples required forthe PhaseSum to reach the 360-
  degree value.The accumulation is done for each bar
        in thedata
  set butis limited to a value of 40 bars. The limitationis based on
  our assumption that cycle periodsof 40 bars and longer
        result in
  a Trend Mode, and detailed knowledge of their periods is not

a necessary. If the cycle periodhas not been identified within the
  maximum 40-bar accumulation period, then it is assigned the
  value of the cycle periodmeasurement for the previous sample.
  It is thensmoothed by an EMA whose alpha equals 0.25 to cre-
It ate a pleasing presentation. The lag due to thisEMA is 3 bars.
ate a pleasing presentation. The lag due to this EMA is 3 bars.

                                      Measuring Cycle Periods
                                     Measuring Cycle Periods                       65

 Inputs:                      Price         ( (H+L)/2);

 Vars : Smooth( 0 ) I
          Detrender( 0 )                     l
vars:     I1( 0 ) I
          Q1 ( 0 )               ,   (0),
          Phase( 0 ) I
          Deltaphase ( 0 ) ,
          InstPeriod(0),
          count ( 0 ) l                  (0),
          PhaseSum( 0 ) ,
          Period ( 0 ) ;
                                     ,
    If  CurrentBar>                   5      then   begin
If        Smooth =                   (4*Price +        3*Price[l]     +    2*Price[2]
    Price[3] ) / 10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[21
    .5769*Smooth [4]- .0962*SmoothL61 ) * ( .075*
             Period = [l]+                    .54);                                 -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = (.0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender[21 -
        Ql   .5769*Detrender(                        [4]-  .0962*DetrenderL61       *
                                    .075*Period111  +  .S41;                   -
            I1 =                       DetrenderL31 ; -

    {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
             the                   discriminator}                       before applying
            I1 =                 .15*11 +     .85*11         [l]
                                                           ;
            Q1 =                 .15*Q1 +     .85*Q1         [l]
                                                           ;

    {Use ArcTangent to compute the current phase)
    If AbsValue(I1) z 0 then Phase=
         If  ArcTangent                       (AbsValue          (Ql/Il);=     phase}
    {Resolve the ArcTangent ambiguity for quadrants
    2, 3, and 4}
    If I1 c 0 and Q1> 0 then Phase= 180 - Phase;
    If I1 0 and Q1 < 0 then Phase = 180 + Phase;
    If I1 0₀ 0 and Q1 0 0 then Phase = 360 - Phase;
    (continued)
  If I1 > 0 and Ql < 0 then Phase = 360 -
    (continued)
   Figure 7.1. PhaseAccumulatorcycle period measurement.
 Figure 7.1. Phase Accumulator cycle period measurement.

                           Rocket Science for Traders
    66                                Rocket Science for Traders

        {Compute a differential phase, resolve phase
        wraparound from quadrant
        1 to quadrant4 , and
        limit delta phase errors}
           DeltaPhase =               Phase[ll  -  Phase;      4,    and
        If PhaseLl] c 90 and Phase> 270 then Deltaphase
        If = 360 + Phase111 - Phase;
        {Limit DeltaPhase to be within the bounds6 of
        = bar and50 bar - cycles}
        If Deltaphasec 7 then Deltaphase= 7; of 6
        If Deltaphase> 60 then Deltaphase= 60;
          If                 <                             =
          If {Sum       Deltaphases       to     reach
                                                   360 degrees.     The   sum is
                 the         instantaneous      period.}
                Instperiod =    0;                            The    sum  is
                Phasesum =  0;
                For     count = 0 to 4 0      begin
                        PhaseSum =        PhaseSum + DeltaPhase[countl;
          For           If  PhaseSum>       360 and     InstPeriod=  0 then
                    If           beginInstPeriod = count;  =    0    then
                        End;
                End;                       =      count;

        {Resolve Instantaneous Period errors and smooth}
        If Instperiod= 0 then InstPeriod=
          If            Instperiod[l];                          smooth}
        Period = .25*InstPeriod + .75*Period[ll;

        Plot1 (Period, "DC"); .75*Period[1];

     End;
   End;
        Figure 7.1. (Continued).
        7.1. (Continued).
      Total lag through the Phase Accumulation cycleperiod
   measurement consists of 6 bars for the first EMA, 3 bars for the
   display smoothing EMA, 7-barslag to compute the original
  Inphase and Quadrature components, and one full cycle of this
   accumulation process. Therefore,the total lag is 16bars plus one
   full-cycleperiod. Sincethe dominant cycle periodis a relatively
   slow varying function of time, this lag may be acceptable in
   many applications. of time, this lag may be acceptable in
many applications.

        Cycle
        67
        Homodyne Discriminator

  Homodyne means we are multiplying the signal by itself. More
  precise, we want to multiply the signal of the current bar with
  the complex conjugateof the signal 1bar ago.The complex con-
  jugate is, by definition, a complex number whose sign of the
  imaginary component has been reversed. Expressing the signal
  in polar coordinates,the arithmetic is Expressing the signal
in polar coordinates, the arithmetic is

     The interesting result is thatwe getboth the square of the sig-
  nal amplitude and the angular frequency (27c / Period) from the
  product becausethe difference in time between samples( t n - t n - 1)
  is just 1bar. I
        nprinciple, this means that we can getthe instanta-
  neouscycleperiod in just two successive samples. The added
  benefit is thatwe also get the square of the signal amplitude.The
  calculations are carriedout using the real and imaginary compo-
  nents rather than converting them to polar coordinates. Either
  way, the results are the same.
     The EasyLanguage code forthe Homodyne Discriminator is
  described with reference to Figure 7.2. The Inphase and Quadra-
  ture components are computed using the Hilbert Transformer as
  explained in Chapter 6. These components are smoothed in a
  unique complexaverager and then smoothed by an EMA to
  avoid any undesired cross products in the multiplication step
  that follows. Consider the result as a composite of signal and
  noise represented by (S+N).If we wereto multiply this by itself,
  we would get S2 + N 2+ SN + NS. Of the four products,three are
  undesired due to noise. Therefore, we must take every measure
  to remove undesired components prior to any multiplication.
  The complex averaging consists of applying the Hilbert Trans-
  former to both the Inphase and Quadrature components. This
  advances the phase of each component by 90 degrees. When the
  Inphase component is advanced by 90 degrees, it becomes equal
  to the Quadrature component. Similarly, when the Quadrature
  component is advanced in phase by 90 degrees, it becomes the
  same as the negative Inphase component. So, if we perform a
  Hilbert Transform on an Inphase component, it will be aligned
 Hilbert Transform on an InPhase component, it will be aligned

68                                      Rocket Science for Traders

      Inputs:         Price    ( (H+L)/2);

      Vars :   Smooth(0),
               Detrender(0),
    Vars:      I1( 0 1 ,
               Q1 ( 0 1 ,   (0),
               jI (01,
               jQ(0) I
               I2 (0),
               Q2 (0)ₗ
               Re (0),
               Im(O),
               Period ( 0 ) ,
               SmoothPeriod(0);                                   a

          If  CurrentBar> 5     then    begin                     .
    Smooth = (4*Price + 3*Price[l] + 2*Price[2] +
    If            Price[3] ) /  10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
    .5769*Smooth[4] - .0962*Smooth [6]
    ) * ( .075*
                  Period[l]     +  .54);        +                  -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = (.0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender[2] -
    .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender [6]
    ) * ( .075*
              Q1  Periodill     +  .54);   +                      -
    11 = Detrender [3]
    ; .0962*Detrender [6])*(.075%
    +
    {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1
    90 degrees}
    by
    jI = (. 0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[41 -
    .0962*11[6]) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
    jQ = ( , 0962*Q1 + .5769*41L21 - .5769*Q1[41 -
    .0962*Q1[6]) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
              JQ =              +                   -             -
    {Phasor additionf o r 3 bar averaging)}
    I2 = I1 - jQ;
    Q2 = Q1 + jI; for 3 bar
                 =        -
    {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
               the    discriminator)                     before   (continued)
                                                                 (continued)
          Figure 7.2.       Homodyne Discriminator cycle period measurement.
          Figure 7.2.     Homodyne Discriminator cycle period measurement.

                           Measuring Cycle Periods        69
    l          I2 =   .2*12 +  .8*12  [l];
               Q2  =  .2*Q2 +  .8*Q2  [l];
               =           +
        {Homodyne Discriminator}
        Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 1
        1
        1 ;
        Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
        Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l1
        ;
        Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[ll;
        If ImC > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period= 360/
        ArcTangent (Im/Re);
        If Period> 1.5*Period[ll then Period=
        1.5*Period [l];
        If Periodc .67*Period[l] then Period=
        .67*Period[l];
               If   Periodc  6 then      Period= 6;    =
        If Period > 50 then Period= 50;
        Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
        SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
                      =            +
               Plot1        (SmoothPeriod,
    I    End;       (SmoothPeriod,     'DC"  1 ; .67*SmoothPeriod(1];
                                         “DC”);

    I
                            Figure 7.2.    (Continued).

  in phase with the Quadrature component. However, the Hilbert
  Transform has a 3-bar lag. The transformed Inphase component
  summed with theQuadrature component is therefore the math-
  ematical equivalent of the simple average of a signal with the
  signal 3 barsago. The same processapplies to performing a
  Hilbert Transform onthe imaginary component and addingit to
  the Inphase component. The net resultis that thenet complex
  averaging lag is 1.5 bars. After smoothing, the signal is multi-
  pliedby the complexconjugate of the signal 1 barago. The
  resulting output real component is the product of the two real
  components added to theproduct of the two imaginary compo-
  nents. Similarly, the resulting output imaginary component is
  the difference of the two input cross products. Boththe real and
  imaginary output products are smoothed again before the cycle
  period is computed. This isdone bytaking the arctangent of the
period is computed. This is done by taking the arctangent of the


                                                      69

          for                        Traders
     70             Rocket Science
          Rocket Science for Traders
     ratio of the outputimaginary component to      thereal component.
     The rate change of the cycle periodis limited to be +-50percent
     of the previous cycle period, andthe resultant period is further
     limited to be greater than 6 bars and less than 50 bars. Finally,
     the period is smoothed for a pleasing display.
              Total lag through the Homodyne Discriminator cycle period
     measurement consists of the following: seven-bars lag to com-
     pute the original Inphase and Quadrature components and
     4-bars lagin each of the three EMAs, and 1.5 bars for the com-
     plex averaging. Therefore, the total lag is a constant 20.5 bars.
     Thenet           smoothing is the same regardless of the measured
     period. Therefore,the Signal-to-Noise Ratioas well asthe lag is
     constant for all cycle periods.     Ratio as well as the lag is
    constant for all cycle periods.
          Dual Differentiator

     We have seen how the phase angleis computed from a complex
     signal as the arctangent of the ratio of the imaginary component
     to thereal component. Furthermore, we have seen that angular
     frequency is defined as the rate change of phase. We can use
     these facts to derive still a third way of using complex signalsto
     measure the cycle period. From the definition of the derivative
     of an arctangent, the mathematics of this process are
    of an   0 = arctan(9)                of this process are

          1
          80- QAI) _                                  -
      Simpldying,andsolvingfor       the cycleperiod   instead of fre-
      quency, weobtain     for     the                instead of fre-
    quency, we obtain  Period =      2n;(12+ Q2)
                                     (IAQ - QM)

      The EasyLanguage code for
        the Dual Differentiator Discrim-
  inator is described with reference to Figure 7.3. The Inphase
inator is described with reference to Figure 7.3. The InPhase

                                            Cycle

                       Measuring Cycle Periods                   71

  Inputs:                  Price( (H+L) /2);

  Vars :   Smooth ( 0 ) ,
           Detrender ( 0 ) ,
  Vars:    11( 0 1 ,
           Q1 ( 0 1 , (0),
           jI ( 0 1 ,
           jQ(O),
           I2( 0 1 ,
           Q2 ( 0 ) ,
           Period ( 0 ) ,
           SmoothPeriod( 0 ) ;

If CurrentBar> 5 then begin
      Smooth = (4*Price + 3*Price [l]+ 2*Price[2]
  If          Price131) /      10;
      Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[21
      .5769*Smooth[41 - .0962*Smooth[61)* ( .075*
               Period[ll           + .54);        +              -

      {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
      Q1 = ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*DetrenderL21 -
      .5769*Detrender14
      1 - .0962*DetrenderL61 1 * ( .075*
         Q1    Period     [l]+     .54);    +                      -
      I1 = Detrender131 ; - .0962*Detrender(6])*(.075%
      +
      {Advance the phase of I1 and 90 degrees}
      by Q1
      jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11L41 -
      .0962*11[61)* ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
      jQ = ( . 0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[41 -
      .0962*Q1[6] ) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
          JQ  =                +                        -          -
      {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)}
             I2 =   I1 -          jQ;     3     bar    averaging)}
           Q2 = Q1 +              jI; for
              =       -
     Q2 {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
      the discriminator}
             I2 =       .15*12 +    .75*12       [l];        before applying
             Q2 =       .15*Q2 +    .75*Q2       [l];
              =            +                                     (continued)
          Q2  =    .15%Q2  +          .75*Q2([1];

      Figure 7.3. DualDifferentialcycle period measurement.
    Figure 7.3. Dual Differential cycle period measurement.

    72         Rocket Science for Traders

        {Dual Differential Discriminator}
        Valuel = Q2*(12 - I2 [l])- I2*(Q2 - Q2 [l]);
        If Valuel .01 then Period = 6.2832*(12*12 +
          Q2*Q2) /   Valuel;     -        -
        If Period > 1.5*Period[ll then Period = +
        1.5*Period [l];
        If Period c .67*Period[l] then Period =
        .67*Period [l];
          If Period  c  6 thenPeriod  = 6; =
        If Period > 50 then Period = 50;
        Period = .15*Period + .85*Period[ll;
        SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
          =                 +
          Plot1 (SmoothPeriod,   "DC");

 End ;                      “DC");

   End;
        Figure 7.3. (Continued).
        Figure 7.3. (Continued).
  and Quadrature components are computed withthe Hilbert
  Transformer using procedures identical to those in the Dual
  Differentiator. These components undergo a complex averaging
  and aresmoothed in an EMA to avoid any undesired cross prod-
  ucts in the
        multiplication step thatfollows. The period is solved
  directly from the smoothed Inphase and Quadrature compo-
  nents. The interimcalculation for the denominator is performed
  as Value1 to ensure that the denominator will not have a zero
  value. The sign of Valuel is reversed relative to the theoretical
  equation because the differences are looking backward in time.
  The rate change of the cycle periodis limited to be 250 percent
  of the previous cycle period, andthe resultant period is further
  limited to be greater than G bars and less than 50 bars. Finally,
  the period is smoothed for a pleasing display.
      Total lag through the Dual Differentiator Discriminator cycle
  period measurement consists of 7-bars lagto compute the original
  Inphase and Quadrature components and 4-bars
        lag in each of the
  two EMAs, plus 1.5 bars for
        the complex averaging. Therefore,
        the
  total lag is a constant 16.5 bars. The net smoothing is the same
total lag is a constant 16.5 bars. The net smoothing is the same

        Periods 73
  regardless of the measured period. Therefore,the Signal-to-Noise
  Ratio, as well as
        the lag, is constant for all cycle periods.
Ratio, as well as the lag, is constant for all cycle periods.
        Cycle Measurement Comparison

     We now have three techniques to measure cycleperiods
  using complex arithmetic. We only know that they vary in lag
  and that thelag is relatively long in each case. The only way to
  determine the best technique is toexercise them ina variety of
  tests. The first test is designed to see how accurately the cycle
  measurement is made using a perfect sine wave. In Figure 7.4,
  we have created an analytic waveform as a pure cycle whose
  period increases linearly from 10 to 40 bars across the screen.
  The cycle length measurements of the three techniques are plot-
  ted in the first subgraph. This subgraph is scaled from 10 to 40
  bars, so vertical displacement shows the measured cycle period.
bars, so vertical displacement shows the measured cycle period.



i3 hfₜₕ +H A lh fe | an
       J | | wn
        |


        [Phase Accumulator
     Mg Bw Oa New Am
  Figure 7.4. Cycle period measurements in response to a chirped analytic
  waveform. TradeSta&W@ by OmegaResearch, Inc. to a chirped analytic
  Chart m t e d with
Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

74 Rocket Science for Traders
  At first glance, it appears that thePhase Accumulator method is
  less accurate than the others. However, recalling that its lag is
  longer than the others for longer cycle periods, this apparent
  inaccuracy is due solely to thelag associatedwith the changing
  waveform period.
      The next stress test for the cycle periodmeasurers deciphers
  how rapidly the cycle measurements respond to an instanta-
  neous shift of frequency in the analytic waveform. To do this,
  we created a waveform that alternately switches between a
  period of 15 bars and a period of 30 bars. The response of the
  three cycle periodmeasurers is shown in Figure 7.5. Now we can
  see some differences. As expected,
        the Phase Accumulator is the
  slowest to respond to this step in thecycle period becauseof the
slowest to respond to this step in the cycle period because of the




                                   “woo

                                  44.00

    Fret}        a TRIES    |        PS
                 ply        tod  |  feo
        [    | |    |   1   |    |
    TTT                 KS      py  200
             \                       or




    Vor we Tor Thay
   Figure 7.5. Cycle measurer transient responses to rapid changes of
   cycle period. rapid changes of
   Chart mated with Tr&tation2oOoi@ by OmegaResearch,Inc.
Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

                         Cycle
                         Measuring             Periods                  75
        Periods
 additional smoothing. Also as expected, the Dual Differentiator
 reacts the fastest in this test.However, the Dual Differentiator
 exhibits some overshoot error. As a result, it appears that the
 Homodyne approachhas the superior transient response.
     Another significant test finds howthe cycle period measurers
 perform as the Signal-to-Noise Ratio degenerates. Market data
  almost always havea poor Signal-to-Noise Ratio, and
        the ability
  to make accurate measurements is crucial. I
        n fact, it was this
  stress test thatled to additional smoothing prior to themultipli-
  cation operations in the Homodyneand Dual Differentiator
  cycle period measurers. Without this smoothing, the perform-
  ance in low Signal-to-Noise environments was just awful, pro-
  ducing measured cycle periods nearly
        half the correct period.The
  performance of the cycle period measurers are compared in Fig-
  ure 7.6 as a function of Signal-to-Noise Ratiowhen measuring a
        7.6
  theoretical twenty-bar sinewave signal.It is clear from Figure
  that the Homodyne approach is not only more accurate at high
  Signal-to-Noise Ratiosbut itsperformance degrades more grace-
  fully as the noise is increased relative to thesignal strength.
     The real acid test of the cycle period measurers' performance
  determines how well they do when acting on real data. We do
  this in Figure 7.7.All three tend to give similar measurements
this in Figure 7.7. All three tend to give similar measurements

        Cycle Measurement Accuracy Versus SN
         »    Cycle Measurement Accuracy            - SIN

         |                                            -Rase    A ~ ~ u m ~ l a t l M l
     3                                           ~    "aalferantslor

        $e                                       —
     &                                           — oul
         1
                   -10   6   -3  0 3                6
        12               SlgnaCto-NoleeRatlo (dB)
         a0   6             a 0  3      6
        Signal-to-Nolse Ratlo (dB)
        Figure 7.6. Phase measurerperformance as a function of
    Signal-to-Noise Ratio.               performance  as    a  function of
          Signal-to-Noise Ratio.

          ty       MPLTHAN                rao
        JJIE
    +    0 WwA=    Cycle- Mode Period \   17°08
                                          ee
        i

    !

 1      A
                                          11248



a      Np
Phase  Act 7 Wilbert Period  15 17    17 3.       |
             ato                                         20

                                                         2000
                                           ARE           -
    =        =     Dual     Differentiator₋  6    - [SS  2000
                                                      ®



       Figure 7.7. Three cycle performance measurements on real data.
                 Chart created with    by Omega Research, Inc.

        Measuring Cycle Periods 77
        Periods
  when the market is in a Cycle Mode. However,there is a wide
  difference in themeasurements when the market is ina Trend
  Mode. Myobservationshave led me toconclude that theHomo-
  dyne is overall more accurate in measurement of cycles when
  the market is in a Trend Mode.
     For all these reasons I conclude that the Homodyne Dis-
  criminator is the superior approach. This frequency measurer is
  used throughout the remainder of this book. measurer is
used throughout the remainder of this book.
        Key Points to Remember
     A basic definition of a cycle is a constant rate change of
   A phase.
     The Hilbert Transform generates Inphase and Quadrature
     components from which the phase at each bar canbe meas-
     ured.
     The phase rate of change is established as the differential
     phase from barto bar.
     Complexaveraging can beaccomplishedbyapplying the
     Hilbert Transformer to both the Inphase and Quadrature
     components, advancing their phase by 90 degrees. The
     phase-advanced components are then algebraically added to
     their orthogonal counterparts to effect the averaging.
     There are at least three differentways to measure cycle
e period using the Inphase and Quadrature components.
     The Homodyne Discriminator is the superior cycle period
     measurer. Discriminator is the superior cycle period
   measurer.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

         Chapter 8
         8

    SIGNAL-TO-NOISE W10

    Logic is a system wherebyone may
    Logic go wrong with confidence.
     go wrong “CHARLES KE’TTERING
         —CHARLES KETTERING

  The signal amplitude is simply the length of the phasor. Recall-
  ing the Pythagorean Theorem, the length of the phasor is the
  square root of the sum of the squares of the Inphase and Quad-
  rature components. We therefore have the signal amplitude on a
  bar-by-bar basis after we
        take the Hilbert Transform.
     The signal amplitude is not of much use by itself. However,
  if we can estimate the signal amplitude relative to the market
if noise, wethen have a tool that estimates the quality of our tech-
  nical analysis. With the kind of market data now available, let
  us develop a unique definition of noise. A sampledsignal is
  shown in Figure 8.l(a)as a sine wave with thesampling uncer-
  tainty represented as the high and low of each bar.The high and
  low is the uncertainty of each of our perfect sinewave sample
  points. We can make good trades as long as
        our signal amplitude
  i s much larger than theaverage daily rangeof the bars. Another
  case for the same signal amplitude is shown in Figure 8.l(b).
  When half the average daily range becomes equal to the signal
  amplitude, making money on a trade becomes a crapshoot.
  Under this condition, it is possible to make an entry at thelow
  of the bar (which contains the signal high) and make an exit at
  the high of the bar (whichcontains the signal low)for zero profit.
  We will therefore term the case where half the average daily
We will therefore term the case where half the average daily

         79
         79

    80    Rocket Science for Traders
    80    Rocket Science for Traders




    A  al


    ... .>    .............,............... ..,.......,...........,.....<...


        J
        Figure 8.1. (a) Fourteen dB SNR. (b) Zero dB SNR.
        Figure 8.1. (a) Fourteen dB SNR. (b) Zero dB SNR.
  trading range is equal to thesignal amplitude as our zero decibel
  Signal-to-Noise Ratio(0 dB SNR)condition. We want the signal
  amplitude to be at least twice the noise amplitude (6 dB SNR)so
  that there exists a reasonable chance to make a profit from our
  analysis.
     We can define the noise as a smoothed average of the daily
  trading range.We can tolerate a 9-bar lagto compute such an aver-
  age becausethe range tends not to change much, and so the noise
  will be an Exponential Moving Average (EMA)with an alpha of
  0.1. The trading range is simply the high minus the low of each
  bar. The EasyLanguage codeto compute the SNR is given in Fig-
  ure 8.2. This code is almost identical to the one we use for the
  Homodyne Discriminatorwith a few additions. First,the noise is
  computed as the variable “Range” near the top of the code. Sec-
  ond, the signal power is computed by adding the square of the
  Inphase componentto thesquare of the Quadrature component.
     The SNR in decibels is calculated in a single line of code near
  the end. The signal poweris divided bythe noise power to get a
  power ratio. The value in decibels is computed as 10 times the

power ratio. The value in decibels is computed as 10 times the

                Signa

                Signal-to-Noise Ratio                 81

Inputs:   Price ( (H+L)/2);

Inputs:   Price ((H+L)/2);

Vars:
     Smooth 0 ,
     Detrender
     I1(0),  (0),
     Q1(0),
     jI(0),

     12(0),

     Re (0),
     Im(0),
     Period (0),
     SmoothPeriod (0),
If       CurrentBar =. 5 then begin

If   {Compute ‘Noise” as the average range}
   Range = .l*( H - L) + .9*Range[l];
    as
   Smooth = (4”Price + 3*Price[l] + 2*Price[2] +
    Price[31 ) / 10;
   Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[21 -
    .5769*Smooth[41 - .0962*Smooth[6]) * ( .075*
         PeriodCl] + .54);          +                -
    - .0962*Smooth[6])*(.075%
   {Compute InPhase and Quadrature components}
   Q1 = ( , 0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender[2] -
    .5769*Detrender[4] - .0962*Detrender[6]) *
     01 ( .075*Period[11 +  .54);                    -
   I1 = DetrenderL31 ; -
    + .54);
   {Advance the phase of 11 and Ql by 90 degrees}
   jI = (.0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
    .0962*11[6]) * ( .075*PeriodEll + .54);
   jQ = (.0962*Ql + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[41 -
    .0962*Ql[6l) * ( .075*Period[I] + ,541;
     JQ        =     +                 1-  +  .54);  (continued)
                                                     (continued)
                    .2.     Computing the SNR.

             Figure 8.2.    Computing the SNR.

82    Rocket Science for Traders
82    Rocket Science for Traders


  {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)
  I2 = I1 - jQ;
  Q2 {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
        I2 =      .2*12 +    .8*12     [l];          before applying
        Q2     =  .2*Q2 +    .8*Q2     [l];
        =                +
  Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
    Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
    ;
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
    If Im <> 0 and Re<> 0 then Period=
    360/ArcTangent (Im/Re)
        If If   Period>                      ;
                           1.5*Period[l]          then  Period=
             1.5*Period[l];               ;
    If Period c .67*Period[l] then Period=
    .67*Period ; [l];
        If      Period<    6  then         Period=   6;  =
        If       Period>   50     then      Period=  50;
        Period =           .2*Period +     .8*Period[l];
                    >                         =
    {Compute smoothed SNR in Decibels, guarding
    against a divide by zero error}
    If Range > 0 then SNR= .25*(10*Log((Il*Il +
  If Ql*Ql)/ (Range*Range) /Log(lO)+ 6) +
             .75*sm111 ;               =)  /Log 10   + 6    +  +
        {Plot      Results}
        Plot1       (SNR,
                          "SNR") ;
        Plot2(6, "Ref");

End;               “Ref”);

End;
                          Figure 8.2.        (Continued)
                         Figure 8.2.   (Continued).

    Signal-to-Noise Ratio    83
    Ratio        83
  logarithm of the power ratio. SinceEasyLanguage takes only
  natural logarithms, the logarithm must be converted to log base
  10 by being divided by the natural logarithm-of 10. A compen-
  sating term of 6 dB must be addeddue to our definition of signal
  to noise. As defined earlier,the signal amplitude is the length of
to the phasor. At 0 dB, the peak-to-peak noise signal is twice the
  amplitude of the signal. Therefore, when we compute the 0 dB
  case, the ratio is calculated to be lO*Log(1/2)"2= -6 dB. We
  must then add 6 dB back into the computation to remove this
  bias, establishing our definition of 0 dB SNR.
      Assuming the noise is relatively constant, the lag of the
  Signal-to-Noise Indicator is just the 7 bars that result from the
  Hilbert Transformer plus the 3 bars due to smoothing of the
  display.
      There is another way to compute the SNR. Recall that in
  the derivation of the Homodyne Discriminator, the amplitude
   squared fell out of the equation automatically when we solved
  for the frequency. In EasyLanguage code,the amplitude squared
   is the sum of the variables Re and Im. Therefore, our alternate
is solution for the SNR is obtained by replacing (Il*Il + Ql*Ql)
   with (Re+ Im). That is
        the only change in thecode shown in Fig-
   ure 8.3. The alternate calculation uses the signal information
   that is smoothed by two EMAS,causing a $bar lag each,plus the
   lag induced by the complex averagingof 1.5 bars. Therefore, we
   expect the alternate SNR computation to produce a result that is
   smoother and has an additional 7.5-bar lag as compared to the
   first (or, primary) calculation. The two SNR computations are
   compared in Figure 8.4. Our expectation of a smoother and more
   delayed alternate computation is manifest.
      The 10-bar lag induced by the computation of the Primary
   SNR makes this calculation unusable for practical trading. The
   additional lag of the Alternate SNR makes its use unthinkable.
   By carefully examining the required conditions, we canarrive at
   an SNR Indicator that has an acceptable lag.
an The first condition of the Hilbert Transformis thatits transfer
   response must have a zero transfer response at zero frequency.
   That means the signal must be detrended. The first thing we do
   aftgr the initial smoothing is touse the Detrender asthe Quadra-
after the initial smoothing is to use the Detrender as the Quadra-

84                                 Rocket Science for Traders
84                                 Rocket Science for Traders

        Inputs:               Price( (H+L)/Z) ;

        Vars :  Range ( 0) ,              ;
                Smooth( 0 1 ,
    vars:       Detrender( 0 ) ,
                11 ( 0 )        ,  0 ,
                Q1( 0 1 ,
                jI ( 0 1 ,
                jQ(O),
                12( 0 1 ,
                Q2 ( 0 1 ,
                Re ( 0 1 ,
                        Re Im(O),
                Period ( 0 ) ,
                SmoothPeriod( 0 ) ,
                S N R ( 0 );

        If  CurrentBarz             5   then   begin
    If          {Compute            "Noise"    as the     average range}
    Range = .l* (H - L) + .9*Range [l];
    Smooth = (4*Price + 3*Price[ll + Z*Price [ZI+
    Price[3] 1 / 1 0 ;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[Z] -
    * ( .075*
    .5769*Smooth[41 - .0962*Smooth [61)
                 Period[l]            +  .54);                       -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = (.0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender[Z] -
    Q1 = .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender[6l 1 * ( .075*
                 Period[l]            + .54);                 -
    I1 = DetrenderL31 ; .0962*Detrendex[6])*(.075%
    I1 {Advance the phase
    of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
    jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[ Z ] - .5769*11[4] -
            JT jQ.0962*11[6]=           ) * ( .075*Period [l]+  .54);
    ( .096Z*Q1 + .5769*Q1[ Z ] - .5769*Q1[4] -
    3Q = .0962*Q1[6l ) * ( .075*Period₋ [l] + .54); -
    {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)}
    {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)} (continued)
    (continued)
    Figure 8.3. Alternate SNR computation.
    Figure 8.3. Alternate SNR computation.

                          Signal-to-Noise Ratio                      85
                         Signal-to-Noise Ratio                      85

          I2 =    I1 -     jQ;
          Q2   =  Q1 +     jI;
          =       -
    Q2 {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
    the discriminat&d
          I2 =     .2*12 +  .8*12[1];             before applying
          Q2   =  .2*Q2 +   .8*Q2   [l];
          =             +
    Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
    Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
    ;
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
    If Im c > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=

    If If360/ArcTangent(Im/Re);
    Period> l.S*Period[l] then Period=
    1.5*Period [l]
                             ;           ;
    If Periodc .67*Period[l] then Period=
    .67*Period [l]
    ;
          If    Periodc   6 then    Period=       6;     =
          If    Period>   50 then        Period=  50;
          Period =      .2*Period +      .8*Period[l];
                   >                      =
    {Compute smoothedS N R in Decibels, guarding
    against a divide
    by zero error}
    If Range > 0 then SNR = .25*(10*Log( (Re+
    Im)/ (Range*Range)) /Log(lO) + 6) + .~~*sNR[I]
    If                              =                               ;
          {Plot          Results}         10 + 6     +   .75*SNR[1];
          Plot1    (SNR,
                            "SNR") ;
          Plot2(6, "Ref'' ) ;

End;               “Ref”);
End;
                         Figure 8.3.      (Continued).
                             8.3.   (Continued).
ture component of the HilbertTransform.                  If we shorten the
Detrender to a 2-bar momentum, the resulting lag is only 1 bar.
Because of the shorter momentum, we need a more aggressive
amplitude correction as a
                             function of the measured period.We can
measure slowly varying periods as we have done previously
                                                                    before
proceeding with thecalculation of the SNR. We also know that if
proceeding with the calculation of the SNR. We also know that if

    86    Rocket Science for Traders
    86    Rocket Science for Traders





. high |lull aflooyHa (ik|
      all f fil fi
        Alpe
    i hy [ire




  wv, -

  Figure 8.4. The alternate SNR computationis smoother and has more lag than
  the primary computation. and has more lag than
  Chart createdwith TradeStattion2000i by OmegaResearch, Inc.
        @

  we take a Simple Moving Average(SMA)over half the measured
  period, the lag of this average is a
        quarter cycle. Aquarter cycle is
  90 degrees of phase lag-exactly the lagneeded to create the
  Inphase component fromthe Quadrature component.This filter-
  ing also reducesthe dominant cycle amplitude by 2/n, so an addi-
  tional n/2 amplitude correction term must be included in the
  computation of the Inphase component.
     All these conditions have been included
        in thecomputation of
  the Enhanced SNR Indicator, as described in the code of Figure
  8.5. I
       nthis code, the period of the measured dominant cycle is cal-
  culated in exactly the same manner as we calculated
        it for the Pri-
  mary SNR Indicator. Nearthe end of the code, after the dominant
  cycle is determined, we
        compute the SNR. The Quadrature com-
  ponent Q3 is calculated by multiplying the 2-bar momentum of
  the Weighted Moving Average (WMA) smoothing by the domi-
  nant cycle amplitude correction factor.The correction terms were
  derived by observing the output amplitude of the 2-bar momen-
derived by observing the output amplitude of the 2-bar momen-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Description : Enhanced Signal to Noise Ratio Indicator
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .:   Enhanced            to            1
  Inputs:                                                                                                       Price( (H+L)/2);

  Vars : Smooth (0),                                                                                                         ;
         Detrender (0)
                                                                                                                      l
 Vars:   11(01,
         Q1(01,                                                                                                   (0),
         jI (01,
         jQ(O),
         I2( 0 1 ,
         Q2 ( 0 1 ,
         Re ( 0 1 ,
         Im(0)
                                                                                                                I
         Period                                                                                                  (01 ,
         SmoothPeriod(0),
         count ( 0 1 ,
         13 (01,                                                                                                   (0),
         Q3 ( 0 1 ,
         Signal (0),
         Noise (0),
         S N R ( 0 );

    If  CurrentBar>                                                                                               5      then    begin
  If     Smooth =                                                                                                       (4*Price +  3*Price[ll + 2*Price [21+
      Price[3] ) / 10;
      Detrender = (.0962*SmoOth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
      .5769*Smooth [4]- .0962*Smooth [6]1* ( .075*
           Period                                                                                                 [l]+     .54);      -

      {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
      Q1 = (.0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
      .5769*Detrender[4] - .0962*Detrender [6]
        QlI1( =.075*Period[l1                                                                                                    +  .54);      (6])*) *⁻
                                                                                                                Detrender     [3];

      {Advance the phase
      of I1 and Q1
      by 90 degrees}
      jI = ( . 0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
      .0962*11[6]) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
      jQ = ( . 0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[4] -
     JQ .0962*Q1[6]) * ( .075*Period - [l]+ .54); (continued)
      *(.075*Period 1 + .54);
      (continued)
      Figure 8.5. Enhanced SNR computation.
      Figure 8.5. Enhanced SNR computation.

                                                                                                                                    87
                                                                                                                                   87

88                     Rocket Science for Traders

            {Phasor     addition       for
                                            3 bar   averaging)}
            I2 =   I1 -  jQ;
            Q2 =    Q1 + jI;       for   3  bar
            =       -
    02 {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
            I2 =   .2*12 +        .8*12     [l]      before    applying
    ;
    Q2 = .2*Q2 + .8*Q2 [l];
    +
    Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
    Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
    ;
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[ll ;
    If Im c > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
    360/ArcTangent(Im/Re);
    If Period > 1.5*Period[l] then Period=
    l.S*Period [l]
                                        ;    ;
    If Period c .67*Period[ll then Period=
    .67*Period [l]
    ;
            If   Periodc    6      then     Period=     6;    =
    If Period> 50 then Period= 50;
    Period = .2*Period + .E*Period[l];
    SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[l];
    =
    * ( .1759*SmoothPeriod +
    Q3 = .5*(Smooth - Smooth [21)
    - 4 6 0 7 ) ;
        Q3 I3   =  0;         -                                         +
    For count= 0 to Int(SmoothPeriod/2) - 1 begin
            =       I3 =   I3 +      Q3    [count];
            End ;    =                                        - 1   begin
    I3 = 1.57*13 / Int(SmoothPeriod/Z);

    Signal = I3*13 + Q3*Q3;
    Noise = .l*( H - L)* (H - L)* .25 + .9*Noise [l];
    If (Noisec > 0 and Signalc > 0) then S N R =
    If .33*(lO*Log(Signal/Noise)/Log (10)) + .67*SNR
            Plot1( S N R , "SNR'') ;                 /Log 10 +  .67*SNR[1];
            Plot2(6, "Ref");

    end;               “Ref”);

    end;
                                   Figure 8.5.      (Continued).
                            Figure 8.5.    (Continued).

        Signal-to-NoiseRatio S9
        Ratio
 turn when the chirp waveformof Figure 7.4 was applied.The out-
 put amplitudes for the 10-bar cycle period and the 40-bar cycle
 periodwereused to compute the straight line compensation
 terms 0.1759 and 0.4607.The Inphase componentI3 is computed
 as the half-dominant cycle moving
        average multiplied by the 4 2
 amplitude correction term. Again, the noise poweris computed as
 the square of the averaged range of the bars, and the signal power
 is computed asthe sum of the square of the Inphase component
 and the square of the Quadrature component.The total lag of the
 Enhanced SNRIndicator is only
        4 bars, comparedto the10-bar lag
 of the Primary SNR Indicator. This lag comprises1bar forthe ini-
 tial smoothing, 1bar forthe computation of the Quadrature com-
 ponent, and2 bars forthe final smoothing of the indicator.
     The performance of the Enhanced SNR Indicator is shown in
 Figure 8.6 with the same data that we used in thecomputation
  of the Primary and Alternate SNR Indicators in Figure 8.4. The
  Enhanced SNR Indicator now has lag properties that make it
 useful for trading. now has lag properties that make it
useful for trading.






    i
    magi |

        -



    T    m




Figure 8.6. The Enhanced SNR Indicator has minimum lag.
     Chart mated with Tr&&ti&Om @ by Omega Reseamb,Inc.
   Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

      90                         Rocket Science for Traders
90                                              Rocket Science for Traders
            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
            Description        : Hilbert Oscillator
            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
      Description         :    Hilbert  Oscillator                            1
            Inputs :          Price ( (H+L) /2);

            Vars :  Smooth (0),
                    Detrender (0),
      vars:         I1 (0),
                    Q1 (0),       (0),
                    jI ( 0 1 ,
                    jQ(O),
                    I2 ( 0 1 ,
                    Q2 ( O ) ,
                    Re ( 0 )  ,
                    Im(O),
                    Period ( 0 ) ,
                    SmoothPeriod (0),
                    count (0),
                    13 (01,           (0),
                    Q3 (0);

            If CurrentBar      >  5 then     begin
      If            Smooth =     (4*Price + 3*Price     [l]+  2*Price[2]  +
                      Price    [3]
                    Detrender     =) /   10;                              -
    (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2]
    .5769*Smooth [4]- .0962*Smooth [6]
    ) * ( .075*
                      Period[l]       +  .54);                     -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = ( . 0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
    .5769*Detrender [41 - .0962*Detrender [6]
    ) *
                    I1 ( =.075*Period [l]      +  .54);       (6])*⁻
                              Detrender [3];                -

    {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1 by
    90 degrees}
    jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
    .0962*11[61)* ( .075*Period[ll + .54);
    jQ = ( .0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[4] -
    3Q .0962*Q1[61)* (. 075*Period[ll₋ + . 5 4 ) ; (continued)
    *(.075*Period(1] + .54);
    (continued)
    Figure 8.7. Hilbert Oscillator computation.
    Figure 8.7. Hilbert Oscillator computation.

                                     Signal-to-NoiseRatio           91
                                         Signal-to-Noise Ratio           91

    {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)}
        I2 =    I1 -        jQ;            bar     averaging)}
        Q2 =    Q1 +        jI;       for 3
         =           -
    {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
        I2 =     .2*12 +           .8*12   [l];     before   applying
        Q2    =  .2*42 +           .8*Q2   [l];
         =                 +
    {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
    Im = I2*Q2[l] - Q2*12 [l]
    ;
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l];
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[ll;
    If Imc > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
    360/ArcTangent(Im/Re);
    If Period> 1.5*Period[ll then Period=
    1.5*Period [l]
                                      ;     ;
    If Periodc .67*Period[ll then Period=
    .67*Period [l];
        If     Periodc       6        then  Period=  6;      =
    If Period> 50 then Period= 50;
    Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
    SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
                 =                      +
                                                   * ( .1759*SmoothPeriod +
        Q3 =     .5* (Smooth -             Smooth  [21)
              .4607);
Q3 I3         =  0;                -   Smooth([2])*(.1759*SmoothPeriod +
    For count= 0 to Int(SmoothPeriod/2)- 1 begin
    I3 = I3 + Q3 [count];
        End;          =                                  -   1  begin
    I3 = 1.57*13 / Int(SmoothPeriod/2);
    Valuel = 0;
    For count= 0 to Int(SmoothPeriod/4)- 1 begin
    Valuel = Valuel + Q3 [count];
         End;         =                                  -   1  begin
    Valuel = 1.25*Valuel / Int(SmoothPeriod/4);

    Plot1 (13, "I"); / Int (SmoothPeriod/4);
    Plot2 (Valuel, ) ;
    "IQ"

End;                               “IQ");

End;
                            Figure 8.7.          (Continued).
                           Figure 8.7.     (Continued).

  92 Rocket Science for Traders
92 Rocket Science for Traders
     While not related to SNR, the reduced lag procedure that
  leads to theEnhanced SNR Indicator suggests a way to develop
  a fast and responsive oscillator. If we compute a quarter-cycle
a moving average of Q3, it will lag Q3 by 45 degrees. The half-
  cycle moving average of Q3 lags Q3 by 90 degrees.Since Q3
  leads the cycle component of the signal by 90 degrees, it follows
  that thetwo moving averageswill cross 22.5 degreesin advance
  of the crests andvalleys of a theoretically perfectcycle. Al-
  though this will notbe a leading indicator because of the 2-bar
  lag requiredto compute Q3, it does prove itselfto be superiorto
  most currently available oscillators. The code to compute the
  Hilbert Oscillator is given in Figure 8.7, and its performance is
  shown in Figure8.8. The bandwidth for the computation of
  Value1 is twice the bandwidth of 13. Therefore, the amplitude
  compensation will beless, approximately the square root of
  1.57, which is about 1.25. approximately the square root of
 1.57, which is about 1.25.



    Mh ill  [te
    .pt]J  lil Ju. pg₋    i    I





        ! of Wi A
        - - of of bam

   Figure 8.8. The Hilbert Oscillator identifies every major turning point.
Figure 8.8. Cbartmated witb TradeSttiotQOOOi@ byOmegaResearcb,Inc. point.
        Chart created with by Omega Research, Inc.

        Signal-to-Noise Ratio
        93
        Key Points to Remember

     The average high to low range of the bars can be considered
© noise because the range is the uncertainty of making good
     Cycle Modetrades.
     The phasor amplitude is the signal amplitude. good
     CycleMode trading should beavoided when the SNR is
     below 6 dB. SNR is
     The Primary SNR Indicator has a lag of 10 bars.
© The Alternate SNR Indicator has an additional 7.5 bars of
© lag, thus making a total lag of 17.5 bars.
     The Enhanced SNR Indicator reduces lagto only 4 bars.
     A useful oscillator results from minimizing Hilbert Trans-
   A form lag. results from minimizing Hilbert Trans-
   form lag.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

Chapter 9

    THE SINEWAW INDICATOR

   A painter can  hanghis pictures,
but a w i t e r c a nonly hang himself.
but a writer can -EDWARD DAHLBERG
    —EDWARD DAHLBERG

 As noted in Chapter 6, the Hilbert Transform synthesizes the
 Inphase and Quadrature components from the analytic wave-
 form. We can then immediately compute the phase of the signal
 by taking the arctangent of the ratio of these components. In
 principle, that should tell uswhere we are positioned within the
 cycle. Unfortunately, this is not true. Thefirst problem is that
 the Hilbert Transform induces a lag of 7 bars. That lag is a sub-
 stantial portion of most tradable cycles. The second problemis
 that even that phase measurement is typically verynoisy,
 requiring many more bars of data to be used. The lag thus ren-
 ders the phase measurement made directly from the Hilbert
 Transform unusable.
     However, the Hilbert Transform can be usedto measure the
  dominant cycleperiod.Since the dominant cycleperiod is a
  slowly varyingfunction of time, the lag of this measurement is
  often acceptable. We assume this to be the case forour analyses.
  Knowing the dominant cycle period,we can heterodyne the per-
  fect dominant cycle with the original price data. Heterodyning
  produces the sum and differencefrequencies.Since both the
  price data and the dominant cycle have the same frequency, we
  can isolate the direct current (DC,or zero frequency)component
  by filtering. This process givesthe phase of the dominant cycle
by filtering. This process gives the phase of the dominant cycle

        95
    95

 96 Rocket Science for Traders
        for Traders
 without lag. Thus, we can compute indicators having zero lag
 from this information.
     The EasyLanguage codeto measure dominant cycle phaseis
  described with reference to Figure 9.1.The majority of the code
  computes the Hilbert Transform and finds the dominant cycle
 period using the preferred Homodyne Discriminator. The phase
  computation part of the code begins with a comment line as a
  flag. The first step is to smooth the price data. Anycomponents
  having a cycle periodless than 6 bars are not desired andshould
  beremovedbefore the computations commence. We remove
  them by employing a 4-bar Weighted Moving Average [WMA).
  The WMA introduces l bar of lag that we will want to remove
  by compensation later in the calculations. Next, the smoothed
  data are multiplied by the real (cosine)component of the domi-
  nant cycle and independently by the imaginary [sine) compo-
  nent of the dominant cycle. The products are summed then over
  one full dominant cycle. We compute the phase angle asthe arc-
  tangent of the ratio of the imaginary part to the real part. The
  phase increases from left to right across the chart. A 90-degree
  reference shift is immediately introduced. Next, we must
  remove the l-bar lag that was introduced by the smoothing of
  the price. This is done by adding the phase corresponding to a
  l-bar lag of the smoothed dominant cycle period.
     Finally, the phase ambiguity is removed forthose cases where
  the imaginary part is less than zero, providinga 360-degree phase
  presentation. Normally, we thinkof the phase as going from
        0 to
  360 degrees andthen repeating for the next cycle. However, we
  perform the cycle wraparound at 315 degrees because there is a
  tendency forthe phase to be near 0 degrees when the market is in
  a downtrend. If the wraparound were at 360 degrees, the swing

a from the bottom of the subgraph to the top provides less than a
  pleasing display.
     The way the phase display behaves in a TrendMode can
  potentially provide some useful information to a trader. First,
  phase tends to stop advancing when the market is in a Trend
  Mode. That is, there is no rate of change and, therefore,
        no cycle.
  The phase tends to rest near 180 degrees when the market is in
  an uptrend and tends to rest near 0 degrees when the market is

an uptrend and tends to rest near 0 degrees when the market is

             SinewaveThe                 Indicator                 97
                              The Sinewave Indicator               97

 Inputs:    Price                ( (H+L)/2);

 Vars : Smooth( 0 ) ,
          Detrender ( 0 ) ,
  Vars:   I1( 0 1 ,
          Q1 ( 0 )            ,   (0),
     jI ( 0 1 ,
     jQ(0)I
     I2( 0 1 ,
     Q2 ( 0 1 ,
     Re ( 0 ) ,
     Im(0)
     I
     Period( 0 ) ,
     SmoothPeriod( 0 ) ,
     SmoothPrice( 0 ,
     DCPeriod ( 0 ) ,
     RealPart ( 0 ) ,
     ImagPart( 0 ) ,
     count ( 0 ) I (0),
     DCPhase( 0 ) ;
     (0),
If CurrentBar> 5 then begin
     Smooth = (4*Price + 3*Price [l]+ 2*Price[21 +
 If         ~rice[3])/               1 0 ;
     Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[21 -
     * ( .075*
     .5769*Smooth [4]- .0962*Smooth [6l)
            Periodrl] +           .54);   +                       -

     {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
     Q1 = ( . 0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
     * ( .075*
     .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender [6l)
         Q1 = Period[l] +         .54); +                         -
     I1 = Detrender [3]; .0962*Detrender(6])*(.075%
     +
    I1 {Advance the phase
     of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
     jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
         JI jQ.0962*11[6]=          ) * ( .075*Period[ll  + .54);
     (.0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1L21 - .5769*Q1[41 -
    3Q = .0962*Q1[6]* +) * ( .075*Period₋ [l]+ .54); (continued)
     (.075*Period 1 + .54); (continued)
     Figure 9.1. Computingthe dominant cycle phase.
     Figure 9.1. Computing the dominant cycle phase.

98                                           Rocket Science for Traders
98                  Rocket Science for Traders

    {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)}
         I2 =    I1 -  jQ;         for 3                    }
         Q2 = Q1 +     jI;                   bar  averaging)
      12          -
    Q2 {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
           the      discriminator}                    before     applying
    I2 = .2*12 + .8*12 [l]
    ;
    Q2 = .2*Q2 + .8*Q2 [l]
    ;
    I2 =
    Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
    Re Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
    ;
    Re Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
    If Im c > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=

    If If360/ArcTangent( Im/Re);
    Period₅ 1.5*Period[l] then Period=
    1.5*Period [l]
      If If  Period c          ;
                         .67*Period[l]              then  Period=
      If If.67*Period          [l];
             Periodc     6    then          Period=  6;      =
    If If Period > 50 then Period= 50;
    If Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[l];
    SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[l];
    =
    {Compute Dominant Cycle Phase}
    SmoothPrice = (4*Price + 3*Price[l] + 2*Price[2] +
    Price[31) / 10;
         DCPeriod =     IntPortion(SmoothPeriod +               .5);     +
         RealPart =     0;
         ImagPart =     0;                                +  .5);
    For count = 0 To DCPeriod - 1 begin
      For         RealPart = RealPart + Cosine(360 *              count /
    DCPeriod) * (SmoothPrice [count]
    ) ;
    ImagPart = ImagPart + Sine(360 * count /
    DCPeriod) * (SmoothPrice [count]
         End;                                                    ) ;  /
    If AbsValue(Rea1Part) > 0.001 then DCPhase=
    If IfArctangent(1magPart / Realpart);
    AbsValue(RealPart1c= 0.001 then DCPhase= 90 *
    If Sign( ImagPart);
         DCPhase =     DCPhase +             90;    then DCPhase  =   90 *
      DCPhase     =  DCPhase    +  90;                           (continued)
                                                               (continued)
                               Figure 9.1.   (Continued).
                      Figure 9.1.           (Continued).

                             The Sinewave Indicator        99
                      The Sinewave Indicator            99

        {Compensate for one bar lag of the Weighted
        Moving Average}
        DCPhase = DCPhase + 360 / SmoothPeriod;
        If ImagPart e 0 then DCPhase = DCPhase + 180;
        If DCPhase > 315 then DCPhase = DCPhase - 360;
                 <               =
        Plot1 (DCPhase, "Phase"); = DCPhase - 360;

    End ;    “Phase”);

    End;
                 Figure 9.1.            (Continued).
                 Figure 9.1.     (Continued).
    in a downtrend. The reason for this is that although the price
    data havebeendetrended,    there is still some residual trend
    across the 6 bars of the Detrender. The summation of the prod-
    uct of the pure trend to the complex components of the domi-
    nant cycle can be thought of as similar to theintegrals domi-
    nant cycle can be I m = / 2R x Sin(x)dx     -27c
                  Im= |0 /02R    =
        Re = x Cos(x)dx= 0
        0
      The ratio of the RealPart to the Imaginary will always be a
  small number when the market is in a Trend Mode. However,
  the sign of that number will be negative when the market is in
  an uptrend and positive when the market is in a downtrend. As
  a result, the phase will be near 180 degrees in uptrending mar-
a kets and near0 degrees in downtrending markets.
      We obtain the Sinewave Indicator by plotting the sine of the
  measured phase angle. This gives us an oscillator that always
  swings between the limitsof -1 and +l.We enhance the usabil-
  ity of this oscillator by plotting the sine of the phaseangle
  advanced by45 degrees. The effect of plotting these two lines is
  shown for both the phasor and time-domain presentations in
  Figure 9.2. Adding 45 degrees clearly advancesthe phasor froma
Figure 9.2. Adding 45 degrees clearly advances the phasor from a

    100    Rocket Science for Traders
    100    Rocket Science for Traders



    Pa XX



        Figure 9.2. Phasor and time-domain views of the Sinewave
        Indicator. Phasor and time-domain views of the Sinewave
      Indicator.
  &-degree slantto the vertical position. This phaseadvance
  means the LeadSine waveform will crest before the sine crests.
   The LeadSine and Sine lines cross 22.5 degrees, or l/l6th of a
   cycle, beforethe turning point of the cycle is reached. If the mar-
   ket has a cycle of 16 barsor less, this isa signal to enteror exit a
   trade immediately. If the market has a longercycle, there is
   some built-in anticipation time before youpull the trigger.
      Compared to conventional oscillators such as the Stochastic
   or Relative Strength Indicator (RSI),the Sinewave Indicator has
or two major advantages.These are the Sinewave Indicator has
   1. The Sinewave Indicator anticipates the Cycle Mode turning
1. 2. point rather thanwaiting for confirmation.
      The phase does not advance when the market is in a Trend
    2.  Mode. Therefore, the Sinewave Indicator tends to not give
        false whipsaw signals when the market is in a Trend Mode.

   A n additional advantage is that the anticipation signal is ob-
   tained strictly by mathematically advancing the phase. Momen-
   tum is notemployed. Therefore,the Sinewave Indicator signals
   are no more noisy than theoriginal signal.
      The code to compute and display the Sinewave Indicator is
   given in Figure 9.3.This EasyLanguage codeis identical to the code
   given forthe phase in Figure 9.1 except for
        the plot statements.
       The Phase and Sinewave Indicators are plotted against both
   theoretical analytic waveforms and real-world data to demon-
theoretical analytic waveforms and real-world data to demon-

       Inputs:  Price         ( (H+L)/2);

       Vars:  Smooth(0),              ;
             Detrender( 0 ) I
   Vars:     I1( 0 ) I
             Q1 ( 0 1 ,   (0),
             jI ( 0 1 ,
             jQ(01,
             I2( 0 ) ,
             Q2 ( 0 1 ,
             Re ( 0 1 ,
             Im(O),
             Period ( 0 ) ,
             SmoothPeriod( 0 ) ,
             SmoothPrice( 0 ) ,
             DCPeriod ( 0 ) ,     (0),
             RealPart ( 0 ) ,
             ImagPart( 0 ) ,
             count( 0 ) ,
             DCPhase ( 0 ) ;

If CurrentBar> 5 then begin
      Smooth = (4*Price + 3*Price [l]+ 2*Price[2] +
  If            Price[3])       /   10;
      Detrender = (.0962*Smooth+ .5769*Smooth[2] -
      * ( .075*
      .5769*Smooth [4]- .0962*Smooth [61)
                Period[l] +         .54);                     -

      {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
      Q1 = ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
      .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender [6l)*
          Ql         = ( .075*Period[l1 +    .54);           -
             I1 = Detrender[31; -

      {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
      jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11 [2]- .5769*11[4] -
      .0962*11[6] ) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
      jQ = ( .0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1 [2]- .5769*Q1[4] -
     JQ = .0962*Q1[6]) * ( .075*Period[ll⁻ + .54); -
      {Phasor addition for
      3 bar averaging)}
              I2 =      I1 -  jQ;         3  bar averaging)}
             Q2      =  Q1 +  jI;     for
               =         -
          Q2   =     Ql  +                                  (continued)
  L                                                       (continued)
        Figure 9.3.       EasyLanguagecodetocomputetheSinewaveIndicator.
        Figure 9.3.     EasyLanguage code to compute the Sinewave Indicator.

                                          101
                                         101

102                        Rocket Science for Traders
102                     Rocket Science for Traders

    {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
        I2 =     .2*12 +      .8*12     [l]          before applying
    ;
    Q2 = .2*Q2 + .8*Q2[l];
    +
    Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12[l] + Q2*Q2 [l];
    Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l]
    ;
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re[l];
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
    Re If Imc > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
    Im = 360/ArcTangent (Im/Re)
    ;
    If If Period > 1.5*Period[ll then Period=
    1.5*Period[l] ;
    If If Period c .67*Period[ll then Period=
    .67*Period [l]
    ;
       If If   Periodc       6     then    Period=  6;      =
    If Period> 5 0 then Period= 50;
    If Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
    If SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
                 =                  +
    {Compute Dominant Cycle Phase}
    SmoothPrice = (4*Price + 3*Price[ll + 2*Price[21 +
    Pricer31 1 / 10;
        DCPeriod =          IntPortion(SmoothPeriod +        .5);     +
        RealPart =          0;
        ImagPart =          0;                           +  .5);
    For count= 0 To DCPeriod- 1 begin
    RealPart = RealPart + Cosine(360 * count /
       For               DCPeriod) *    (SmoothPrice       [count]
    ) ;
    ImagPart = ImagPart + Sine(360 * count /
    DCPeriod) * (SmoothPrice [count]
    ) ;
         End;                 =              +                     /
    If AbsValue(Rea1Part) > 0.001 then DCPhase=
    Arctangent(1magPart / Realpart);
    If If AbsValue(Rea1Part)c= 0.001 then DCPhase= 90 *
    Sign( ImagPart);
       If DCPhase =        DCPhase +    90;         then DCPhase = 90 *
               (ImagPart);                                      (continued)
       DCPhase        =  DCPhase   +  90;
                                                            (continued)
                            Figure 9.3.   (Continued).
                          Figure 9.3.   (Continued).

                   The Sinewave Indicator        103

              The Sinewave Indicator        103

        {Compensate for one bar lag of the Weighted
        Moving Average}
        DCPhase = DCPhase + 360 / SmoothPeriod;
        If ImagPart c 0 then DCPhase = DCPhase + 180;
        If DCPhase > 315 then DCPhase = DCPhase - 360;
              <                        =      +
        Plot1 (Sine (DCPhase), "Sine") ; DCPhase - 360;
        plot2 (Sine (DCPhase+ 4 5 ) , "Leadsine" ;

    End ; (Sine (DCPhase +  45),  “LeadSine”);

    End;
                   Figure 9.3.    (Continued).
               Figure 9.3.      (Continued).

    strate their performance. Figure 9.4 shows
                                           a theoretical sinewave
    analytic waveform whose period increases
                                           linearly from 10 to 40
    bars. The Sinewave and Phase Indicators are displayed
                                      in                   thetwo
    subgraphs. Note how the phase rate of change decreases as the
    cycle period becomes longer.
                            The dotted line is a typical point of
    reference, illustrating that the analytic waveform and the Sine
    line of the SinewaveIndicatorcrestsimultaneously,and      the
    measured phaseis 90 degreesat thispoint. The Leadsine always
    crosses the Sine line before the turning point in thecycle, giving
    advance indication of the cyclic turning point. The amount of
    advance warningrelative to the length of the cycle is less for the
    shorter cycles.
     A real-world trading scenario is depicted in Figure 9.5. The
    market is in a Trend Mode for nearly the entire left half of the
    chart, as identifiedby the lack of phase rate of change and lackof
    crossovers by the Sinewave Indicator. The Cycle Mode of the
    chart is identified by the rectangle. The Cycle Modestarts when
    the phase rate of change is approximately the same as the phase
    rate of change of the dominant cycle. The Cycle Mode ends
                                                             when
    the phase rate of change becomes negative-a clear impossibility.
    During the CycleModeperiod,   the SinewaveIndicatorgives
    three buy signals and
                                  two sell signals.All are excellent except
                                                              the
    last one, which almost always happenswhen the cycle fails.

last one, which almost always happens when the cycle fails.

    104    Rocket Science for Traders
    104    Rocket Science for Traders



i fil h A A iH / hog
    oe bie     J)









Figure 9.4. TheSinewave Indicator alwaysgives an advanced turning-
point warning. advanced turning-
Chart mated with Tradesttion2GOOi@ by OmegaResearch,Inc.
        by Omega Research, Inc.





    me ll       Mp
               ome
        AR       I
             AARNE
               My:




   Figure 9.5. The Sinewave Indicatorgives correct Cycle Mode signals.
Figure Chartmated with TraakStati~OOOiby Omega Research,Inc.
        @
       Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

        The Sinewave Indicator 105
        Key Points to Remember 105

     The phase computed from the Hilbert Transform cannot be
® used directly because of the lag that results from computing.
     The cycle period measurement is a slowly varying function
        the dominant cycle.
     of time and may be used as
     The phase of the dominant cycle is computed by heterodyn-
     ing the complex dominant cycle with thesmoothed analytic
     waveform and taking the arctangent of the complex compo-
     nents.
     The phase hoversnear 0 degrees in downtrends and near 180
     degrees in uptrends.
     The SinewaveIndicator consists of the Sine of the Dominant
     Cyclephase and the Sine of the Dominant Cyclephase
     advanced by 45 degrees (Leadsine).
     The Sinewave Indicator gives entry and exit signals 1/16th of
     a cycle periodin advance of the cycle turning point.
     The Sinewave Indicator seldom gives false whipsaw signals
   a when the market is in a Trend Mode. whipsaw signals
   when the market is in a Trend Mode.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

    Chapter 10







        Never ~ i s t a ~ e
        motion for action.
        Never mistake -ERNEST HEMINGWAY
        —ERNEST HEMINGWAY

 Perhaps the term i ~ ~ ~ f f ~ ~ f f ~ e o ~ s
        is a bit presumptuous to apply
 to the concepts we discuss in this chapter. Nonetheless, the
 term is somewhat appropriate in that our technology enables us
 to compute a continuous trendline from which we can rapidly
 assess market action. As derived from the Drunkard’s Walk
 problem in Chapter I, our model says the market consists of a
 Trend Mode and a Cycle Mode. It is more accurate to describe
 the general market as a combination of these two modes. Fur-
 thermore, in Chapter 3 we prove that we can completely elimi-
 nate the dominant cycle component by taking a Simple Movin
 Average ~~~1 over the period of the cycle. If we take a simp1
 average over the period of the dominant cycle on a bar-by-bar
 basisbecause we have been able to identify a continuously
        dominant cycle-we basically have a variable-len~th
 moving average. This m o v i n ~average is important because the
 dominant cycle component is always notched out. It follows
 that if the composite analytic waveform consists of only a trend
 component and a cycle component, and if we remove the cycle
 component, the residual must be the trend. Of course, this is not
 precisely true, because there will always be components other
 than the dominant cycle present. However, this is a workable
than the dominant cycle present. However, this is a workable


    107

  108 Rocket Science for Traders
108
  solution for trading purposes becausethe secondary cyclesusu-
  ally have a small amplitude.
     We employ a 4-bar Weighted Moving Average (WMA)
        in con-
  junction with theInstantaneous Trendline to give an indication
  of when the price crosses the Instantaneous Trendline. Having
  only a l-bar lag, the 4-bar WMA is useful for this purpose. One
  way to recognize the onset of a trend is to countbackward from
  the current bar to thefirst crossing of the WMA and the Instan-
  taneous Trendline. If the count isgreater than a half-dominant
  cycle, youknow that themarket is in a Trend Mode.The reason
  for this is that if the market were in a Cycle Mode, we would
  expect the price to cross the Instantaneous Trendline every half
  cycle. Failureto do this is a clear indication of a Trend Mode.In
  fact, an amended rule might say that theonset of a Trend Mode
  is declared if the price has crossed more than a quarter cycle ago
is and does not appear to even try to head back acrossthe Instan-
  taneous Trendline. This amended rule willget you into a Trend
  Mode trade much earlier. However, aswith allanticipatory sig-
  nals, you will get caught in an error once in a while. A Trend
  Modeisover when the Smoothed Price crosses the Instanta-
  neous Trendline.
     Because we are taking anSMA over the entireperiod of the
  dominant cycle, the lag of an Instantaneous Trendline is one-
  half the dominant cycle. This lag is unavoidable. It isalso pos-
  sible to take an SMA overhalf the period of the dominant
  cycle. The half-period average has a quarter-cycle lag. The
  result is that the quarter-cycle average will cross the Instanta-
  neous Trendline just as the Sinewave Indicator reaches a peak
  or valley. The half-period average crossing the Instantaneous
  Trendline can be used as a confirmation signal, which is
  another way of identifying when the price has reached a cyclic
  turning point.
     The EasyLanguage
        code to compute the Instantaneous
  Trendline is given in Figure 10.1. As in computations in previ-
  ous chapters, the code starts with the Hilbert Transform and
  measures the dominant cycle using the Homodyne Discrimina-
  tor algorithm. The Instantaneous Trendline is computed by
  averaging the priceover the integer number of bars of the
  smoothed dominant cycle. This average is smoothed in a 4-bar
smoothed dominant cycle. This average is smoothed in a 4-bar

Inputs:    Price          ( (H+L)/2);

Vars : Smooth( 0 ) ,
Vars:   Detrender( 01 ,
        I1(01,
        Q1 (01,            (0),
        jI ( 0 1 ,
        jQ(0)ₗ
        I2( 0 ) l
        Q2 ( 0 1 ,
        Re (01,
        Im(0)  I
        Period     ( 0 1 ,
        SmoothPeriod( 0 ) ,
        SmoothPrice( 0 ) ,
        DCPeriod ( 0 ) I           (0),
        RealPart ( 0 ) ,
         ImagPart( 0 ) ,
         count( 0 ) ,
         ITrend( 0 ) , (0),
        Trendline ( 0             ;

  If CurrentBar>          5 (0);               then begin
If       Smooth =      (4*Price +           3*Price[l]               +  2*Price [23  +
    PriceL31 ) / 10;
   Detrender = (.0962*Smooth+ .5769*Smooth[2] -
    .5769*Smooth[41 - .0962*Smooth [6]
    ) * ( .075*
    Period[l] + .54); .0962*Smooth[6])*(.075%

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
   Q1 = ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
    .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender [6]
        Ql Period         [l]+     .54);                                       ) * ( .075*
   I1 = Detrender [3]; - .0962*Detrender(6])*(.075*

    {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
   jI = (.0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
    .0962*11[6]) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
    jQ = ( .0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[4] -
        JQ                        .0962*Q1[6] ) * ( .075*Period - [l]+   .54);   -
    {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)}
          I2 =    I1 -    jQ;               3   bar          averaging)}
         Q2 = Q1 +        jI;         for
        Q2 =   Q1  +      FI;                                                (continued)
                                                                             (continued)
Figure 10.1.       EasyLanguagecodetocomputetheInstantaneousTrendline.
Figure 10.1.      EasyLanguage code to compute the Instantaneous Trendline.

                                            109

110                        Rocket Science for Traders
110             Rocket Science for Traders

    {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
          I2 =  .2*12 +   .8*12     [l];       before applying
    Q2 = .2*Q2 + .8*Q2[1];
    +
    Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l]
    ;
    Im = I2*Q2[1] - Q2*12 [l]
    ;
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re[l];
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
    If Imc > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
    360/ArcTangent(Im/Re) ;
    If Period z 1.5*Period[ll then Period=
    l.S*Period [l]
                                ;   ;
    If Period c .67*Period[ll then Period=
    .67*Period [l]
    ;
    If If   Period c    6  then     Period=  6;       =
    If Period > 50 then Period= 50;
    Period = .%*Period + .8*Period[l];
    SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[l];
    =
    {Compute Trendline as + simple average over the
    measured dominant cycle period}
    DCPeriod = IntPortion(SmoothPeriod + .S);
    ITrend = 0;
    For count = 0 to DCPeriod- 1 begin
    ITrend = ITrend + Price [count];
          end;  =                       -
    If DCPeriod 0 then ITrend = ITrend / DCPeriod;
    Trendline = (4*ITrend + 3*ITrend[ll +
    2*ITrend[2] + ITrend[31 ) / 10;
    If CurrentBarc 12 then Trendline= Price;
    SmoothPrice = (4*Price + 3*Price[l] +
    2*Price[2] + price [3]) / 10;
    +
    Plot1 (Trendline, "Trendline");
    Plot2 (SmoothPrice, ) ;
    "SP"
    End;    (SmoothPrice,
End;
                           Figure 10.1.  (Continued).
                 Figure 10.1.       (Continued).

        The Instantaneous Trendline 111
        The Instantaneous Trendline 111
 WMA to make the Instantaneous Trendline a little smoother.
 The price itselfis also smoothed in a 4-bar WMA to provide the
 second line of this indicator.
     The actions of the Instantaneous Trendline andthe Smoothed
 Price curves are shown in Figure 10.2. The SmoothedPrice
 crosses the Instantaneous Trendline during the third week in
 August. The measured dominant cycle period during this time
 was about 22 bars (see Figure 7.7). Since the price doesnot even
 try to come back to theInstantaneous Trendline, we declare the
 trend in force about five days afterthe crossing, around the first
 of September.According to this indicator, the trend stays in
 force until the Smoothed Price crosses
        the Instantaneous Trend-
 line again, in mid-January. Other indications from the Sinewave
 Indicator would have declared the trend over near the first of
 December, however. With reference
        to Figure 9.5, the Sinewave
 Indicator line crossing earlyin December signals a Cycle Mode
 buy signal. crossing early in December signals a Cycle Mode
buy signal.


        WE                                                         fe
        NE

        |                                                          wn

        4|    Wo tr                                                 a
        r
    Figure    10.2. The Instantaneous Trendlineclearlyshowshow    to trade the
    trend.        shows     how     to     trade     the
    Chartmated with TradeStation2OLW@by OmegaR8search, Inc.
    Chart created with TradeStation 2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

  112 Rocket Science for Traders
112
        Key Points to Remember

     The Instantaneous Trendline is generated by removing the
     dominant cycle component of the composite waveform.
     This is done taking a simple average over the period of the
     dominant cycle.
     A trend is declared in force if the SmoothPrice has not
     crossed the Instantaneous Trendline within the previous
     half-dominant cycle.
     As a faster indication of the trend onset, a trend is declared if
     the SmoothedPrice has not crossed the Instantaneous
     Trendline within the previous quarter-dominant cycle and
     does not appear to start in the
        crossing direction.
     A trend is over when the SmoothPrice crosses the Instanta-
* neous Trendline. the SmoothPrice crosses the Instanta-
   neous Trendline.

        Chapter 11

   IDENTIFYING MARKET MODES

        Invention is the motherof necessity.
        Invention is the "THORSTEIN VEBLEN
        —THORSTEIN VEBLEN

The simplified model of the market, derived from the Drunk-
ard's Walk problem, has only two modes-the Cycle Mode and
the Trend Mode. Through the derivation of the Sinewave Indica-
tor and the Instantaneous Trendline,wehave shown several
ways to estimatewhich mode the market may have for a given
moment. As with most technical indicators, the decision point
between modes is not clear-cut. In fact, trying to automate the
decision often leads to a great dealof chatter and rapid back and
forth switching of decisions.
    Since the Cycle Modeexists for the smallest fraction of time
and since most traders make the most money following a trend
rather than a cycle, it is best to assume that the market is in a
Trend Mode unless some very specific criteria are
        met. There are
only two criteria to establish a Cycle Mode. First, a Cycle Mode
exists for the period of a half-dominant cycle after
        the crossing of
the two Sinewave Indicatorlines. Second, a Cycle Mode existsif
the measured phase rate of change is more than two-thirds the
phase rate of change of the dominant cycle (3GO/Period)
        and is less
than 1.5 times the phase rate of change of the dominant cycle.
    There is another condition that defines a Trend Mode. This
condition is derived from pragmatic observation,not theoretical
considerations. Whenthe market makes a major reversal,it often
does this with great vigor. When this occurs, the prices have a
does this with great vigor. When this occurs, the prices have a

        113
        113

    114            Rocket Science for Traders
114                Rocket Science for Traders
    wide separation from the Instantaneous Trendline.When            the
    prices are widely separated fromthe Instantaneous Trendline, it
    is possible for the Cycle Mode conditions to bemet-but           the
is Cycle Mode identification is clearly incorrect. Ihave therefore
    inserted another overriding rule for these cases. That rule is that
    if the SmoothPrice (the 4-bar WMAof the Price) is separated by
if  more than 1.5 percent from the Instantaneous Trendline, then
    the correct market mode is theTrend Mode.
               We can apply the mode identification in a Tradestation or
    Supercharts Paintbar to visually identlfy the current market
    mode. Inaddition, the mode identification can be usedas a code
    fragment as part of an automatic trading system to establish
    which set of trading rules will be employed.The EasyLanguage
    code to compute the market mode andidentify it as a paintbar is
    given in Figure 11.1.     mode and identify it as a paintbar is
given in Figure 11.1.

       Inputs :     Price ( (H+L) / 2 ) ;

       Vars :  Smooth (0),
    Vars:      Detrender (0)I
               I1 ( 0 1 ,
               Q1( 0 1 ,    (0),
               jI ( 0 1 ,
               j Q ( O ) ,
               I 2 (0)I
               Q2 (0)I
               Re(O),

           Re Im(O),
               Period (0),
               Smoothperiod ( 01 ,
               SmoothPrice (0)I
               DCPeriod ( 0), ,
               RealPart (0 ,
               ImagPart ( 01 I
               count ( 0 1 ,
               DCPhase (0),
           DCPhase 0 ,        (continued)
                   (continued)
           Figure 11.1.     EasyLanguagecodetoidentifythemarketmode.
           Figure 11.1.   Easylanguage code to identify the market mode.

                                  Identifying Market
                                          Modes                               115
                                        Identifying Market Modes          115

      Itrend(O),
      Trendline ( 0 ) ,
      Trend ( 0 ) ,
      DaysInTrend( 0 ) ;
      (0),
If CurrentBar 5 then begin
      Smooth = (4*Price + 3*Price[l] + Z*Price[21 +
  If         Price                [3])/lo;
      Detrender = (.0962*Smooth+ .5769*Smooth[21 -
      * ( .075*
      .5769*Smooth[4] - .0962*Smooth l611
             Period[l]             +    .54);         +               -

      {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
      Q1 = ( . 0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender[21 -
      * ( .075*
      .5769*Detrender[4] - .0962*Detrender [6l)
        Ql   Period[ll                + .54); +                       -
      I1 = Detrender131 ; - .0962*Detrender[6])*(.075*
      +
    11 {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
      jI = (.0962*11 + .5769*11 [2]- .5769*11[4] -
        JT jQ.0962*11[6]=               ) * ( . 075*Period[ll +  .54);
      (.0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[21 - .5769*Q1[41 -
    30 = .0962*Q1[6]) * ( .075*Period⁻ [l]+ .54); -
      {Phasor addition for
      3 bar averaging)}
            I2 =             I1 - jQ;         3    bar
            Q2 = Q1 +             jI;     for
            =                -
    Q2 {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
      the discriminator}
            I2 =             .2*12 +    .8*12      [l]   before  applying
      ;
      Q2 = .2*Q2 + .8*Q2 [l];
    Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
      Re = I2*12 [l]+ QZ*QZ [l]
      ;
      Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
      Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l];
    Re Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
      If Imc > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
        If  = 360/ArcTangent( Im/Re);                    Period  =    (continued)
            360/ArcTangent (Im/Re)                  ;
                                                                   (continued)
                                       Figure 11.1.  (Continued).
                              Figure 11.1.         (Continued).

116                                                 Rocket Science for Traders
116                                              Rocket Science for Traders

    If Period> l.S*Period[l] then Period=
    1.5*Period [l]
       If                               ;
    If Period .67*Period[ll then Period = =
    If If.67*Period [l];
               Period<               6  then                  Period=  6;           =
    If If Period> 50 then Period= 50;
    If Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[l];
    Smoothperiod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;

    {Compute Dominant Cycle Phase}
    SmoothPrice = (4*Price + 3*Price[ll + 2*
    Price [21+ Price [3]) /lo;
    DCPeriod = IntPortion(SmoothPeriod + .S);
    RealPart = 0;
             ImagPart =          0;                                         +  .5);
    For count= 0 To DCPeriod- 1 begin
       For    count  =RealPart/         =       RealPart +                     Cosine(360 *  count
    DCPeriod)* (SmoothPrice [count]
    ) ;
    ImagPart = ImagPart + Sine(360 *
    count/DCPeriod)* (SmoothPrice [count]
    ) ;
    End; count /DCPeriod) * (SmoothPrice [count] ) ;
    If AbsValue(Rea1Part) >O then DCPhase=
    If IfArctangent (ImagPart/ RealPart);
    AbsValue(Rea1Part)c = 0.001 then = DCPhase= 90*
    If Sign( ImagPart) ;
             DCPhase =  DCPhase +             90;                       then   DCPhase =

    {Compensate for one bar of
    lagthe Weighted
    Moving Average}
    DCPhase = DCPhase + 360 / SmoothPeriod;

    If ImagPart 0 then DCPhase = DCPhase + 180;
    If If DCPhase> 315 then DCPhase= DCPhase - 360;
    If {Compute Trendline as simple average over the
    measured dominant cycle period}
             ITrend =          0;                                                  the
    For count= 0 to DCPeriod- 1 begin
    . ITrend = ITrend + Price [count];
             End; ITrend             =  ITrend  +  Price[count];-                  (continued)
       End;
                                                                                (continued)
                        Figure 11.1.                              (Continued).
                      Figure           11.1.   (Continued).

                    Identifying Market
                             Modes                                117
                 Identifying Market Modes                       117

   If DCPeriod> 0 then ITrend= ITrend / DCPeriod;
   Trendline = (4*ITrend + 3*ITrend[ll +
    2*ITrend[2] + ITrendl31) /lo;
    If CurrentBarc 12 then Trendline= Price;
    +
    {Assume Trend Mode} Trendline = Price;
    Trend = 1; Mode}
    {Measure days in trend from last crossing of th
    Sinewave Indicator lines}
    If Sine(DCPhase) Crosses Over Sine(DCPhase+ 45)
    or Sine (DCPhase) Crosses Under Sine(DCPhase+
    If     45)    Then    begin                             +
     or            DaysInTrend =        0;                  +
     45      Then  Trend =   0;
     End;                          = 0;
    DaysInTrend = DaysInTrend + 1;
    If DaysInTrendC .5*SmoothPeriod then Trend= 0;
                    =                   +      1;
    +/- 50% of dominant
  If {Cycle Modeif delta phase is
    cycle change of phase}
    If SmoothPeriod c > 0 and (DCPhase- DCPhase[ll >
    .67*360/SmoothPeriod and DCPhase- DCPhase[ll <
    If     1.5*360/SmoothPeriod)              then Trend= 0;  >
                                                   -            <
    {Trend Mode if prices are widely separated from
    the Trendline}
    If AbsValue( (SmoothPrice- Trendline) /Trendline)
    >=
    .015 then Trend= 1;
    If                                 - Trendline)/Trendline)  >=
          {Paint  Barif in         the  Cycle      Mode}
          If Trend=     0 then      begin
                  Plot1     (high,        "high"1;
    If    Trend  = Plot2    (low,       "low");
          End;
               Plot2 (low,   “low”);
End;

End;
                        Figure 11.1.    (Continued).
                  Figure  11.1.      (Continued).

  118 Rocket Science for Traders
118 Key Points to Remember

     Assume the market is in a Trend Modeunless specific crite-
     ria are met.
     A Cycle Modeexists for a half-dominant cycle afterthe cross-
     ing of the Sinewave Indicator lines or when the measured
     phase rate of change is within 250 percent of the phase rate
     of change of the dominant cycle.
     A Trend Modeis declared if the 4-bar WMA is separated from
® the Instantaneous Trendline by more than 1.5 percent.
     The marketmode canbe identified as a paintbar or used asa
® code fragment in an automatic trading system. used as a
   code fragment in an automatic trading system.

        Chapter 12

     DESIGNING A PROFITABLE
        TRADING SYSTEM

        W t h and science triumph again overignorance
        Truth and  and superstition.  ignorance
        and superstition.     -JOHN EHLERS
                                   —JOHN EHLERS

    I
     n this chapter we develop a completely automatic trading sys-
    tem called the SineTrend Automatic System basedon the rules
    that we develop in the      previous chapters. Our fundamental
    approach is to trade using the Trend Mode rules when the mar-
    ket is in a Trend Mode and trade using the Cycle Mode rules
    when the market is in a Cycle Mode.The code shown in Figure
    12.1is a complete trading system using these rules strictly from
    a theoretical perspective. There is absolutely no accommodation
 a  for real trading situations or specific personalities of the com-
    modity or stock being traded.
         This code was first applied to the Treasury Bonds futures
    contract because the system trades both long and short with
    equal facility. The Treasury Bond data were a back-adjusted con-
    tinuous contract covering the period from9 July 1984to 16 June
    2000, a period of 15.54years. (A back-adjusted continuous con-
    tract is created bystringing real contracts together and adjusting
    all prices inthe  previous contract by the pricedifference
    between contracts at the rollover date. The process is repeated
    foreach new previous contract.) Adding a $1,000 money-
    management stop, the results right out of the box are shown in
management stop, the results right out of the box are shown in

                          l19
        119

120                                    Rocket Science for Traders
120                                    Rocket Science for Traders

       Inputs:                        Price( (H+L) /2);

       Vars:  Smooth(0),
             Detrender(0 ,
    Vars:    I1 (0)I
             Q1(0)I                    0 ,
             j I ( 0 ) I
             j Q ( O ) ,
             I2( 0 1 ,
             Q2 ( O ) ,
             Re (0),
             Im(O),
             Period(0),
             Smoothperiod(0),
             SmoothPrice(01 ,
             DCPeriod (0),               ,
             RealPart (0),
             ImagPart(0 ,
             count ( 0 1 ,
             DCPhase (01 ,
             DCSine ( 0 ) ,
             LeadSine (01 ,
             Itrend(O),
             Trendline ( 0) ,
             Trend(O),
             DaysInTrend ( 0) ;

       If  CurrentBar >                5  then begin
If           Smooth =                  (4*Price +     3*Price[ll + Z*Price[21  +
    Pricer31 ) / 10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[21 -
                  .~769*Smooth                                     * ( .075*
                                            [4] -     .0962*Smooth [61)
                  Period[ll              +  .54);      +                    -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1= ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender121 -
           01   = .5769*Detrender(                [4]- .0962*Detrender [61*
                                 .075*Periodlll +     .S41 ;          -
              I1 =                    Detrender[3] ; -
                                                                       (continued)
           I1   = Detrender(3];
                                                                   (continued)
Figure 12.1.                          EasyLanguage code for an Automatic SineTrend Trading System.
Figure 12.1.      EasyLanguage code for an Automatic SineTrend Trading System.

            Designing a Profitable Trading
                                                       System             121
           Designing a Profitable Trading System                         121

  {Advance         the         phase    of                  90 degrees}
      I1 and Q1 by
jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[41 -
  .0962*11[6]) * ( .075*Period[l] + .54);
jQ = (.0962*Ql + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[41 -
  .0962*Q1[6]) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
  3Q  =                +                          -           -
{Phasor addition for
      3 bar averaging)}
I2 = I1 - jQ;
Q2 = Q1 + jI; for 3 bar averaging)}
      =          -
{Smooth theI and Q components before applying
  the discriminator}
  I2 =       .2*12 +           .8*12   [l].;           before   applying
  Q2 =       .2*Q2 +           .8*Q2   [l];
      =           +
{Homodyne Discriminator}
Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l]
      ;
Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
      ;
Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l] ;
If Im < Z 0 and Re<> 0 then Period=
  360/ArcTangent( Im/Re);
If Period> 1.5*Period[ll then Period=
  1.5*Period [l]
                                 ;      ;
If Periodc .67*Period[ll then Period=
  .67*Period [l];
     If     Period<            6 then  Period=         6;     =
If Period> 50 then Period= 50;
Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
             =                   +
{Compute Dominant Cycle Phase}
SmoothPrice = (4*Price + 3*Price [l]+ 2*Price[2] +
  Price[3]) / 10;
     DCPeriod =     IntPortion(SmoothPeriod +                     .5);   +
     RealPart =     0;
     ImagPart =     0;                                    +     .5);
For count= 0 To DCPeriod- 1 begin
      RealPart = RealPart + Cosine(360 * count /
  For            DCPeriod) *            (SmoothPrice        [count]1 ;
                          =                  +                (continued)
                 DCPeriod)     *   (SmoothPrice[count]);
                                                              (continued)
                         Figure 12.1.         (Continued).
                  Figure 12.1.          (Continued).

122                        Rocket Science for Traders
122                  Rocket Science for Traders

    ImagPart = ImagPart + Sine(360 * count /
    DCPeriod) * (SmoothPrice [count]
        End ;                       =               +            ) ;  /
    If AbsValue(Rea1Part)S O then DCPhase=
    Arctangent(1magPart / Realpart);
    If AbsValue(Rea1Part)c = 0.001 then DCPhase=
    90 * Sign(1magPart);
        DCPhase = DCPhase +                    90;      then DCPhase  =

    {Compensate for one bar lag of the Weighted
    Moving Average}
    DCPhase = DCPhase + 360 / SmoothPeriod;

    If ImagPartc 0 then DCPhase= DCPhase + 180;
    If DCPhase> 315 then DCPhase= DCPhase - 360;
                           <                            =    +
    {Compute > the Sine and LeadSine Indicators}
    DCSine = Sine (DCPhase)
    ;
    LeadSine = Sine(DCPhase + 45);
                 =                             ;
    {Compute Trendline as simple average over the
    measured dominant cycle period}
        ITrend =       0;                                           the
    For count= 0 to DCPeriod- 1 begin
    ITrend = ITrend + Price [count]
    ;
        End;          =                           -
    If DCPeriod> 0 then ITrend= ITrend / DCPeriod;
    Trendline = (4*ITrend + 3*ITrend[l] + 2*ITrend[2] +
               ITrend[3])        /    10;           =
    If CurrentBar c 12 then Trendline= Price; +

    {Assume Trend Mode} Trendline = Price;
    Trend = 1; Mode}
    {Measure days in trend from last crossing
    of the
    Sinewave Indicator lines}
    If Sine(DCPhase1 Crosses Over Sine(DCPhase+ 45)
    If or Sine(DCPhase) Crosses Under Sine(DCPhase+
    45) Then begin
    45 DaysInTrend = 0; Under Sine (DCPhase +
    Trend = 0;
         End;                            =   0;
       End;                =    0;                                    (continued)
                                                             (continued)
                           Figure 12.1.          (Continued).
                       Figure 12.1.             (Continued).

             Designing a Profitable Trading
                                                   System         123

             Designing a Profitable Trading System                    123

   DaysInTrend = DaysInTrend + 1;
   If DaysInTrendc .5*SmoothPeriod then Trend= 0;
                   =                         +
    {Cycle Mode if delta phase +/-
    is 50% of dominant
    cycle change of phase}
    If SmoothPeriod <> 0 and (DCPhase - DCPhase[ll >
    .67*360/SmoothPeriod and DCPhase- DCPhase[ll
    If     1.5*360/SmoothPeriod)              then   Trend=   0;     >
                                                         -            <
    if the SmoothPrice is more
    {Declare a Trend Mode
    than 1.5% from the Trendline}
    If AbsValue((SmoothPrice - Trendline)/Trendline) >=
    .015 then Trend= 1;
    If                                   -   Trendline)/Trendline)   >=
          If       Trend=  1   then   begin
                     If   Trend[ll =  0 then    begin
    If               =         If     MarketPosition =  -1 and   Smooth
             If                Price  >=   Trendline          then buy;
    If If MarketPosition= 1 and SmoothPricec
    Trendline then sell;
             End;        If                   =                   <
    If SmoothPrice Crosses Over Trendline
    End; then buy;
    If SmoothPrice Crosses Under Trendline
    then sell;
          End;                                Under      Trendline
    then sell;
    If Trend= 0 then begin
    If LeadSine Crosses Over DCSine then buy;
    If               If  LeadSine       Crosses     Under     DCSine then
             If    sell;
          End ;                     Crosses  Under  DCSine     then
                   sell;
End;

End;
                           Figure 12.1.     (Continued).
                        Figure 12.1.  (Continued).

124                  Rocket Science for Traders
124                  Rocket Science for Traders
Figure 12.2. Phenomenal!The $398 average profit pertrade with
a 40 percent success rate on only $12,500maximum drawdown
is competitive with any commercially available Treasury Bond
trading system. About 80 percent of the profits were made on
long side trades.
                I was curious as to how much of the action was contributed
by the Trend Mode and how
                                         much was contributed by the Cycle
Mode. I therefore simply deleted the four lines of code that made
the Cycle Mode trades and ran the system again on the same
Treasury Bond data. The results of the Trend Mode-only trading
are given in Figure 12.3.
               These results are simply awful! The average profit pertrade
dropped to negative territory before any rational allowance for
dropped to negative territory before any rational allowance for

Total Net Profit      $92,875.00
Gross Profit         $201,031.25     Gross Loss              ($108,156.25)
Total # of trades              233   Percent                        40.77%
                                      profitable
Number winning                  95   Number losing                       138
 trades                               trades
Largest winning       $15,468.75     Largest losing            ($1,156.25)
 trade                                trade
Average winning        $2,116.12     Average losing                ($783.74)
 trade                                trade
Ratio avg win/                2.70   Avg trade                       $398.61
 avg loss                             (win & loss)
Max consec.              consec. 5   Max    loss)                         11
 Winners                              losers
Avg # bars in                   20   Avg # bars in                         5
 winners                              losers
Max intraday
 drawdown             ($12,500.00)    losers  in                         5
Profit Factor                 1.86   Max # contracts                       1
Profit Factor            1.86         held                               1  J
                                      held
Figure 12.2.     Original SineTrend performance summary on Treasury Bonds-
9 July 1984 to 16June 2000. performance summary on Treasury Bonds—
9 July 1984 to 16 June 2000.

                      Designing a Profitable Trading
                                       System        125
                      Designing a Profitable Trading System                 125 l
    Total Net Profit     $19,968.75
    Gross Profit         $39,093.75    Gross Loss                  ($59,062.50)
    Total # of trades              81  Percent profitable                18.52%
    Number winning                 15  Number losing                         66
      trades                           trades
    Largest winning       $8,218.75    Largest losing trade         ($1’000.00)
      trade
    Average winning       $2,606.25    Average losing trade            ($894.89)
      trade
    Ratio avg win/               2.91  Avg trade     trade              $246.53
      avg loss                         (win& loss)
    Max consec.                     2  Max consec.losers                      12
      Winners
    Avg # bars in                  38  Avg # bars in losers                   8
      winners                          Avg # bars in losers                   8
    Max intraday         ($23,343.75)
      drawdown
    Profit Factor                0.66  Max # contracts held        1
    Profit Factor             0.66     Max # contracts held                   1
    Figure 12.3.     SineTrendtrend only performance summary on Treasury Bonds-
    9July 1984to 16June 2000.        only performance summary on Treasury Bonds—
    9 1984 to     16  June 2000.
slippage and commission! The first thing these results indicate
        this
i s that thesystem is being carriedby Cycle Mode trades. At
point, it seems prudent to make a concession to real-world real-
ities and try to modify the Trend Moderules. One of the easiest
things to do is change the computation of the Instantaneous
Trendline. By increasing or decreasingthe Instantaneous Trend-
line SMA length, the resulting Instantaneous Trendline will be
either more reactive or will react slower. If we change the code
by using a CycPart multiplier, the SMA length is still related to
the period of the measured dominant cycle. The code fragment
for the Trendline calculation was changed asindicated in Figure
 12.4. After changing the code, optimizing on a CycPart of 1.15,
and increasing the money-management stop to $1,100, the
results indicated in Figure 12.5 were obtained. These changes
and optimizations are not “curve fitting’’ because the testing
 and optimizations are not “curve fitting” because the testing

126              Rocket Science for Traders
126              Rocket Science for Traders

    {Compute Trendline as simple average over the
    measured dominant cycle period}
       ITrend  = 0;                as                     average over  the
       IntPeriod =        IntPortion (CycPart*SmoothPeriod-              + . 5 ) ;
       For     count =    0 to IntPeriod                  1 begin
               ITrend     =    ITrend    +  Price [count];               +   .5);
       End ;         =                      -
    If DCPeriod > 0 then ITrend = ITrend / IntPeriod;
    Trendline = (4"ITrend + 3*ITrend[l] + 2*ITrend[2] +
               ITrend[3]) /   10;               =
       If CurrentBar e         12 then Trendline               =  Price;        +

       If     CurrentBar    <  12    then   Trendline          =
Figure 12.4.   Code fragment for optimizable Instantaneous Trendline calculation.
Figure 12.4.   Code fragment for optimizable Instantaneous Trendline calculation.


Total Net Profit        $113,525.00
Gross Profit            $205,000.00     Gross Loss                     ($91,475.00)
Total # of trades              191      Percent profitable                    44.5%
Number winning                 85       Number losing                           106
 trades                                  trades
Largest winning          $16,062.50     Largest losing                  ($1,125.00)
 trade                                   trade
Average winning           $2,411.76     Average losing                    ($862.97)
 trade                                   trade
Ratio avg win/                 2.79     Avg trade                           $594.37
 avg loss                                (win & loss)
Max consec.                         5   Max consec.           8
 winners                                 losers
Avg # bars in                      24   Avg # bars in         6
 winners                                 losers               6
Max intraday              ($8,137.50)    losers
 drawdown
Profit Factor                  2.24     Max #                 1
Profit Factor                    2.24    contracts held       1
                                         contracts held
Figure 12.5.              SineTrend performance summary on Treasury Bonds, modified
CycPart = 1.15, money-managementstop = $1,100-9     July 1984to 16June 2000.
CycPart = 1.15, money-management stop = $1,100—9 July 1984 to 16 June 2000.

         Designing a Profitable Trading
                                         System           127

        a Profitable
covered a 16-year span andthe results carry a substantial trade-
to-parameter ratio.
    These results areoutstanding! Thenet a profit has been
increased by 22 percent over the original system. The increased
net profit and reduced
        number of trades have produced nearly a
        50
percent increasein the average profit per trade. Further,the max-
imum drawdown overthe 15-year period was reduced by35 per-
cent. Incidentally, going back and checking onthe Trend Mode-
onlyperformanceafter the Instantaneous Trendlinewasopti-
mized, Igot the results shown in Figure12.6. Now the Trend
Mode has been enhanced to carry its share of the load. The opti-
mization resulted from a minor increase
        in the period to calculate
the Instantaneous Trendline. increase in the period to calculate
the Instantaneous Trendline.

    Total Net Profit     $43,062.50
    Gross Profit         $98,906.00     Gross Loss       ($55,843.75)
    Total # of trades              67   Percent profitable 35.82%
    Number winning                 24   Number losing              43
                                         trades
     Largest winning     $16,062.50     Largest losing    ($1,781.25)
     trade                               trade
     Average winning     $4,121.09      Average losing    ($1,298.69)
     trade                               trade
     Ratio avg win/              3.17   Avg trade        $642.72
     avg loss                            (win & loss)
     Max consec.                    4   Max consec.         6
     Winners                             losers
     Avg # bars in                 52   Avg # bars in      13
     winners                             losers
     Max intraday
     drawdown            ($10,956.25)    losers     in             13
     Profit Factor               1.77   Max # contracts     1
    Profit Factor        1.77            held               1
        held
 Figure 12.6. SineTrend performance summaryonTreasuryBonds(Trend
 Mode-only), modified CycPart = 1.15, money-management stop = $1,500-
 9 July 1984 to 16June 2000. = 1.15, money-management stop = $1,500—
9 July 1984 to 16 June 2000.

  128 Rocket Science for Traders
128 Rocket Science for Traders
     The continuous and sustained equity growth of this Sine-
  Trend Automatic System over the 15-year periodindicates just
  how robust this system is. A major contribution to its robust-
  ness is thefact that theunderlying principles of the system were
  basedpurely on theoretical considerations. Equity growth is
  shown in Figure 12.7.
      The obvious question to ask now is whether the SineTrend
  Automatic Systemworks with contracts other than Treasury
  Bonds. Since the system is based purely on theory, the answer is
  that it should be universal.
        There are boundto be some issues for
  whch it trades better than others, however. To test the premise
  that it can be applied to other securities, I applied the modified
  SineTrend to the back-adjusted Swiss Franc
        futures contract over
  the period from 13 February 1975 to 1 June 2000. When the Cyc-
  Part input was optimized for 1.10 and the money-management
  stop was set at $2,200, I obtained the results shown in Figure 12.8.
      The results of the SineTrend Automatic Trading System are
  more than respectable-they are on par with the results obtained
  by most commercially available trading systems. The average
by most commercially available trading systems. The average



$120,000

$100,000

 $80,000

 $60,000

 $40,000        i

 $20,000

      30
    SEE FESROR JRL    JRC
            FETE     &ROO
        Figure 12.7.  Equity Curve.
        Figure 12.7. Equity Curve.

                      Designing a Profitable Trading
                                           System               129
                      Designing a Profitable Trading System     129
    Total Net Profit  $139,212.50
    Gross Profit      $366,575.00     Gross Loss      ($227,362.50)
    Total # of trades           460   Percent profitable     50.87%
    Number winning              234   Number losing             226
     trades                            trades
    Largest winning    $12,712.50     Largest losing    ($3,200.00)
     trade                             trade
    Average winning     $1,566.56     Average losing    ($1,006.03)
     trade                             trade
    Ratio avg win/             1.56   Avg trade             $302.64
     avg loss                          (win& loss)
    Max consec.                   9   Max consec.                 8
     winners                           losers
    Avg # bars in                16   Avg # bars in               7
     winners                           losers
    Max intraday
     drawdown          ($18,187.50)    losers      in             7
    Profit Factor              1.61   Max # contracts           1
    Profit Factor        1.61          held                       1
        held
Figure 12.8. SineTrend performance summary on Deutschemark, modified
        Cyc-
Part=1.10,money-managementstop=$2,200-13Pebruary1975 to 1June2000.
        stop = $2,200—13 February 1975 to 1 June 2000.
Part=1.10, money-management
profit per tradeis $302. The probability of success is over 50 per-
cent. The ratio of average win to averageloss is 1.5G:l. Joe
Krutsinger callsthis the“daddy-goes-to-townnumber,” meaning
that every time daddy goesto townhe brings home $1S O when
he is a winner as opposed to giving up$1when he is a loser.
    The SineTrend system, as presented, is just acorefrom
which much more sophisticated and profitable systems can be
spawned. The trading rules I have provided are extremely sim-
ple. There is an infinite number of ways these rules canbe
enhanced. For example, we know the Sinewave Indicator crosses
one-eighth of a cycle beforethe turning point. For longer cycle
periods, we couldbe entering and exiting the Cycle Mode trades
too early. It would not be terribly difficult to add a lag factor
relating to the measuredperiodbefore entering CycleMode
 relating to the measured period before entering Cycle Mode

       130    Rocket Science for Traders
    130       Rocket Science for Traders
  trades. There mayevenbe better or more reactive ways to
  switch between the Trend Mode andthe Cycle Mode.A correct
  mode determination is bound to have a profound effect on the
  trading system because deciding the mode is the primary deci-
  sion to be made before the rules are applied. It is my desire to
  turn you loose on making the system better. I look forward to
  hearing of your successes. system better. I look forward to
hearing of your successes.
        Key Points to Remember

                   The SineTrend Automatic Trading System switches trading
              rules depending on the mode of the market.
              In the TrendMode,trades         are made on the basis of the
           In SmoothPrice crossingthe Instantaneous Trendline.
              In the Cycle Mode, trades are madeon the basis of the cross-
           In ing of the Sinewave Indicator lines.
                 The automatic trading system based on theoretical princi-
    %             ples performs on par with commercially available systems
              right out of the box. commercially available systems
           right out of the box.

Chapter 13





    The real danger i s not that computers will begin to
    The real think like men, but that men w.11 to
    begin to think like computers.
     begin to think like     -SYDNEY      J. HARRIS
     —SYDNEY J. HARRIS
    e purpose for invoking transform arithmetic is to apply a tool
      ward solving a differential equation problem by using simple
toward solving a t this tool, many of the problems we encou
     table. There are many kinds of trans~orms,
      example, Mellin and Legendre Transforms exist for working in
    c~lindricaland spherical coordinates. Hankel and Meijer Trans-
   forms exist for working with Bessel Functions. The list goes on
 and on.
and    The data with which we deal in trading are sampled data. We
    The data with e data once per bar regardless of the time frame
                  ny price charts are displayed as daily data. The
  sampling basis is equally valid for other sampling periods, such
       as weekly, hourly, or even one-minute bars. A11 information
  scales to the sampling period. The correct transform tool to use
 for this data is the 2 Transform. We describe the 15 Transform in
  this chapter so that we can later assess the transfer character-
   istics of more complicated filters. It is instructive to review
   several other transf~rmsso that we can relate our problem solu-
    tions to real-world situations, achieving greater insight into
      both the problem and its solution. Because most traders have
  had no previous exposure to this powerful tool, I explain trans-
       form arithmetic in the simplest possible manner and only in
 terms of how it applies to trading.  manner and only in
terms of how it applies to trading.

                                131

  132 Rocket Science for Traders
132 Laplace Transform

  The Laplace Transform is used, among other purposes, to solve
  for the transientconditions in electrical circuits. As an illustra-
  tion, a simple electrical circuit isshown in Figure 13.1.A tran-
  sient occurs after the switch is closed. We will show the solution
  for how the voltage V changes as a function of time after the
  switch is closed. From physics we
        know that thecurrent flowing
  through a capacitor is proportional to the size of the capacitor
  and the rate change of voltage acrossit. The equation for current
  flow i s change of voltage across it. The equation for current
flow is I = C - dV
        d t
  After the switch is closed, current flows through the resistor,
  through the capacitor, and is returned to the battery that has a
  voltage E. From Ohm's Law, the voltage V is thebattery voltage
  less the current multiplied by the Resistance R. That is,
less the current V = E - I R = E - R C - dV R. That is,
        dt
  We now have a differential equation to solve forV as a function
  of time. Differential equations are pretty scary stuff, so let us
of time. Differential equations are pretty scary stuff, so let us




    - \    R I " I
        |



  Figure 13.1. A simple electrical circuit for transient analysis
Figure 13.1. A simple electrical circuit for transient analysis.

       Arithmetic
                  Transform                133
       Transform Arithmetic                133
invoke the Laplace Transform by substituting the Laplace Op-
erator S for the calculus operator (dldt).Our equation now be-
comes the calculus operator (d/dt). Our equation now be-
  comes               V =E - RCSV
                      v     E     sv
                                    ""
                   RC - RC

                  vs        -
                            1
                      V =  RC,       E
                              S+- RCᴵ

  Amazing! We have solved the problem for the voltage V using
  only simple algebra. More precise,V is a function of the Laplace
  Operator, and should be written as  a function of the Laplace
  Operator, and should be written as

                   V(s1=           RC  E
                          S+-RC

   In general, the outputfunction Y(s)is equal to the input
                                                             function
   X ( s )multiplied by the system transfer response H(s).In other
   words, the system transfer response is the X ( s ) / Y ( s )
                                           ratio.
                      We really want the solution for voltage as
                                                  a function of time.
   The way we do this is tocompare the relationship between the
   Laplace Transform andthe solution in the timedomain. Trans-
   form pairs for these solutions can be foundin many handbooks
   and textbooks on the subject. In this case, we find
                                           that             thetrans-
   form pair is on the subject. In this case, we find that the trans-
  form pair is                          S + aᵁ  (1- e-"')
                                (1-e™)
                                   pat

  134 Rocket Science for Traders

  By examining like terms, we immehately have the solution for
  voltage in the timedomain as have the solution for
voltage in the time V(t )= E( -
        1

  Thus, we have solved a relatively complex differentialequation
  using the Laplace Transform and simple algebra. I n the S Do-
  main, the output is the inputmultiplied by the transfer response
  of the system. In other words, the transfer response is the ratio
  of the input tothe output. In this format, the transfer function
  can describefilters independent of the input driving function. In
  our example, the input is the constant battery voltage E. This
  input is multiplied in the S Domain (and in the time domain
  because it is a constant)
        by the transfer responseof the RC filter.
  We will see this form of equation again when we examine Z
  Transforms. form of equation again when we examine Z
Transforms.
        Fourier Transform

  WhatLaplace Transforms are for transient analysis, Fourier
  Transforms arefor steady-state analysis. Recalling thatthe
  expressionforcomplexfrequency is e'"t, when we take the
  derivative of the complex frequency we get
        d(ei"')/dt= jo e'"t. So
  the Fourier Transform operatorfor the rate of change is jo
  instead of S. The Fourier and Laplace Transforms share many
  common characteristics.
     Fourier Transforms are the tools we use to describe relation-
  ships in the timedomain and frequency domain. For example,
  an impulse in the frequency domain is a definition of a pure
  monotonic cycle. This cycle is a sinewave in the timedomain.
  Fourier Transforms have many applications for the solution of
  physical problems. For example, the relationship between the
  pattern across a lens and the projectedimage constitutea
  Fourier Transform pair. Similarly,the relationship between the
  aperture distribution of an antenna and the radiation pattern,
  somewhat analogous to a flashlight beam, is a Fourier Trans-
  form pair. to a flashlight beam, is a Fourier Trans-
form pair.

       Transform Arithmetic                                  135
                                                135
                                2 Transform

   Just as Laplace and Fourier Transforms are powerful tools for
   continuous systems, Z Transformsprovide       a corresponding
   powerful tool for discrete systems. There are significant paral-
   lels between Z Transforms andFourierTransforms.         The Z
Transform can be multiplied by the transfer response of a sys-
tem toobtain a 2 Transform of the system output. Thesampled
data output for a discrete system can be found by taking the
inverse Z Transform. Becausethis theory is so important todig-
ital signal processing,a brief review of Z Transform theory is in
order.
   We begin by defining
      a sequence of samples of the form xo,xl,
      and so on. We designate the sequence of values by {x(nT)],
x2, x3,
or because the sampling period T can beconsidered unity,
simply (x(n)}.
      The sequence may consist of a finite number of
samples or can be infinite in extent. The Z Transform of the se-
   quence is given as in extent. The Z Transform of the se-
  quence is given as    Z{x(n)] 2
                              =            x(n)z-.
                                n = O
   since all values of x are 0 for n < 0. Suppose the sequence (x(n))
   consists of an infinity of values as         the sequence
  consists of an   (x(n))
       = (a, a2,                a3, a4, . . . } = (a).

   where a  0. The Z Transform for the sequence is
  where a <0.      Z 2          1
      X ( z )= x(n)z-n= (a).z-" = 2 (az-l).
                   n = O    n = O           n = O
       =                                   =
Designating the common ratio as Y = m", the Z Transform is
recognized as the geometric progression 1, Y, r2, r3,r4,.. . . The
sum of the terms of this progression is 1, 7%, 13, r%,. ... The
  sum of the terms of this             --I"
                                1
       S=-                      1
                                        --I
       1-r

     136        Rocket Science for Traders

     Since r is less than.unity and n approaches infinity, the     sumsim-
     plifies to S = l/(1 - I).Substituting r = a+,       we obtain  sim-
    plifies to S$ = 1/(1 — 1).  X(2)   1 r        --     obtain
                                 = l--2'          -   2
                                                    2 - a

     We can now find the         Z Transform of a step function where
     x(n)= 0 for n < 0 and x(n)= 1 forn 2 0. In this case,         where
    x(n)       =0 for n <0 and   =  2                    case,
                                    00
                                 X(2)=        z-=--- 2
                                  n = O           2 - 1
                                   =                 2
                One of the more interesting and useful properties of the Z
     Transform is the effect of a one sample delay on a function. Sup-
     pose a sequence i s given by       sample delay on a function. Sup-
    pose a sequence is given by

  the Z Transform of this sequence i s . . .
the Z Transform of this sequence is

     Now, suppose the sequence is delayed byone sample time. The
     Z Transform of the output sequence then is given by     The
    Z Transform of  Y(2)= x(0)z-1+ x(1)z-2+ x(2)z" + . . .
     Or simply     Y(z)              + x({1)z2 +         +. . .
    Or simply                             Y(2)=X(2)z-1

     That is, a one sample time delay is equivalent to multiplying the
     Z Transform by 2". An additional delay results in an additional
    Z factor of z", and so on. This can be seen in equation form as
    factor of     and so on. This     xIn) +         in equation form as
                                 x(n - 1)+ x(+-1
                                 x(n - 2) -+ x(2)z-2
         x(n - 2                       >

       Arithmetic
                               Transform                        137
           Transform Arithmetic                     137
     For a transform to work, there must be an inversion. Since
  Z[x(n)}
        =X(z),then theinverse operation is writtenas Z-'[X(z)]
        =
  x(n).
       There are several waysto obtain the inverse transform, but
  perhaps the easiest is suggested by the original definition of the
  Z Transform. The expansion of X(z)into a sumof inverse pow-
Z ers of z will exhibit x(n)as coefficients of the expansion. When
  X(z)is a rational fraction, the expansion can be made by long
  division. For example, we can find the Inverse Z Transform for
  the step function whose Z Transform was Z Transform for
the step function whose Z X(z) z
        =-
        z - 1

      Performing the long division, weobtain
    Performing the long        1+ z-'  + z-2+ z3 + . . .
           z - l)z
       z-1)z z - 11                             +...
                               z-11 1- z-'
                                       z-'  -
                                       2-1   2-2
                                             Z-2

                                             2-2 - 24
                                                z4

       We have thus re-created the original step function with which
       we started. We can also create some common Z Transform pairs
       by inspection. For example, we knowthat  Z Transform pairs
     by inspection. For example, we
                                    Z[an}    z
                                           =-
                                           z - a
                                     = ——
       We can substitute e-kT= e-kfor a (since e-k is anumber less than
       unity and the sampling period is unity) and obtain less than
     unity and the sampling          is         and obtain
                               Z(e-h}           z
                                                =-
                                             z - e-k
                                     = ——
       We now have a transform pair for an exponential function.
     We now have a transform pair for an exponential function.

              for      Traders
         138       Rocket Science
    138        Rocket Science for Traders
      Another obvious transform pair exists for an impulse func-
  tion. The impulse function will have a value only during the
  first sample. Its Z Transform is therefore unity. It follows that
  the impulse delayed by q samples is z-4. unity. It follows that
the impulse delayed by g samples is

              Approximations ofAnalog Transfer Functions

  Occasionally, it is desirable to convert a known analog transfer
  function in theS Domain into a digital transfer function. This is
  most often done with thetransfer function of a low-pass or band-
  pass filter, such as a Butterworth or Chebyshev type, becauseof
  the wealth of development and experience with these filters.
  There are two ways to perform this conversion. We describe
  only the impulse invariant method because it directly relates
  the electrical circuit described earlierin this chapter to an Expo-
  nential Moving Average (EMA).
      The impulse invariant method consists of finding the
   impulse response of the analog filter h(t)and setting t = nT. The
   Z Transform of the quantized impulse response is takenso that
   H(z)= Z{h(nT)].
    Z                   It is key to factor the analog transfer response
         and use a partial fraction expansion so that theequation can be
         written in thefollowing form: so that the equation can be
    written in the following form:

              N   A;
         where pi represents the  ithpole (thepoint at which the denomi-
          nator goes to zero),Ai is the magnitude associated with the ith
         pole, and     N is the number of poles. The impulse response is
          given bythe Inverse Laplace Transform,
                                                 which has the following
          form: the Inverse Laplace Transform, which has the following
    form:        1
              h(t)=     N AiePit
              i = 1
          Since each pole in the S Domain gives rise to an exponential
          term in the time
              domain, at the sample times we have
    term in the time domain, at the sample times we have

        Transform Arithmetic                                    139
        Transform                      c
                                          h(nT)= N Aiepint        139
                                                i =  1
   We have derived the Z Transform of an exponential as

  We have derived the Z Transform of an exponential as

                             ni                      z
   Therefore, the Z Transform of the impulse response is
  Therefore, the Z Transform of the impulse response is

                                  N                  Az
   Recalling that thetransfer response of the resistor-capacitorana-
   log filter is given by    response of the resistor-capacitor ana-
  log filter is given by                              l
                             H ( s )=                RC1
                                       S+-RC
                                 S+
   The transfer response has a single polelocated at S = -1/RC. We
   can immediately substituteliketermsto                       obtain the digital
   transfer responseto be          like              terms  to obtain the digital
  transfer response to be                             z

      Zz
      RC
Simplifying,by letting (1- a)= gTRC the equation becomes
  Simplifying, by letting 1 —     =                  AZ     equation becomes
                                       H ( z )= z - ( 1 - a )

    and the frequency responseof the digital filter transfer response
    is given as                  response of the digital filter transfer response
  is given as

        Her)
        jol)                     =

     140
    140    Rocket Science for Traders
     The critical, or cutoff, frequency
                                          is thatpoint at which the ampli-
     tude of the two terms in the denominator are equal. Since o =
     2n/P0, where Po is the period corresponding to the cutoff fre-
     quency, the critical period is          to    the    cutoff fre-
quency, the critical period is
        -2n: -ln(l -a)
        "
        P O
        Po = In(-2n:1 - a)
  This is exactly the cutoffperiodwe asserted for an EMA in
   Chapter 3. Alternatively, if we know the desired cutoff period,
     we can calculate the EMA a as           the desired cutoff period,
    we can calculate the EMA a as

     Let us look at thetransfer response in greater depth.
    Let us look at the transfer response in greater depth.

                                    Az
                                -
                                -     1      A
           m-⁻ (1⁻ a)z"
                                      1  - (1- a)z"
           X ( z )-                          A
            - (1 - a)Y(z)z-'=Ax(z)
           Y(2)

     Converting to the digital domain, and noting that z"        notates a
      one period delay, we get            and noting that notates a
one period delay, we get y - (l -a)y[l] =Ax
        y=Ax+(l -a)y[l]

   If we have a step function input of unity amplitude, the output
If must alsoreach unity when the number of periods is large.
   Therefore, A must equal a.We conclude that thedigital equiva-
      lent of our resistor-capacitoris        that the digital equiva-
    lent of our resistor-capacitor is

        Transform Arithmetic 141
        y = ax+ ( 1- a)y[l]

  This is exactly the equation for an EMA. I
        n other words, the
  EMA is the equivalent of a RC low-pass filter in the physical
  world. equivalent of a RC low-pass filter in the physical
world.
        Key Points to Remember

     Transform arithmetic is used to algebraically solve differen-
     tial equation or difference equation problems that would be
     intractable otherwise.
     I
      n the Z Domain, the output is equal to the product of the
     input and the transfer response.
     The transfer response describes the performance of filters
      independently from the input driving function. of filters
      Laplace, Fourier, andZ Transforms are related.
    Laplace, Fourier, and Z Transforms are related.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

    Chapter 14

    FINITE IMPULSE
    RESPONSE FILTERS

    There i s nothing permanent except change.
    There is nothing permanent “HERACLITUS
        —HEeRracLITUS


  ASimpleMovingAverage (SMA) is one example of a Finite
  Impulse Response (FIR) filter. Spoken,these filters are alterna-
  tively pronounced “eff-eye-are” or“fur” filters. FIR filters have
  no corollary in the physical world-they exist only as digital
  computations. Their uniquecharacteristic is that their impulse
  response is exactly the same as their
        coefficients. An impulse as
  input digital data is simply unity for one sample and zero forall
  other samples. As this impulseages out, that is, as it is succes-
  sively delayed,it excites eachelement of the filter successively,
  sweeping out the amplitude of the filter coefficients. Thus, the
  impulse response is the same as the filter coefficients. The gen-
  eral time response of a FIR filter is coefficients. The gen-
eral time response of a FIR filter is

  Or, more concisely + hox{2] + = 1
Or, more concisely N-l - i]
        yn = C-hix[N
        i = O
  Taking the Z Transform givesus
Taking the Z Transform gives us

        143
        143

    144            Rocket Science for Traders
                                  N -
                                    1¹
                   Y(z)=               hiX(z)z"
                                    i = O
     so that thetransfer response is
    so that the transfer response is

        = Y|Zz =)N-1 hz!
      Note that if the transfer response is expressed as a rational
  fraction, the response of the FIR filter is allzeros. That is, there
  is no denominator other than unity. From the fundamental theo-
is rem of algebra, the Nthorder polynomial describing the transfer
  response can be factored
        into N terms, each ofwhich is a zero of
  the polynomial. Moving averagefilters are characterized as hav-
  ing all-zeroresponses.
      The lag of a FIR filter is equal to thelocation along the filter
  where the sumof the coefficients is equal to half the sumof co-
  efficients in the entire filter. In mathematical form, this condi-
  tion is expressed as filter. In mathematical form, this condi-
tion is expressed as

                   La,              1  N-1
                       hi==               I
     Note thatthe first coefficient, the one with zero lag, is not used.
     Perhaps an easier way to picture the lag is to imagine the filter
     coefficients describingthe height of a geometrical shape. If you
     were to draw this shape on a piece of paper andcut it out witha
     pair of scissors, the lag would be equal to the center of gravity.
     That is, it would be equal to the balance point of the shape. FIR
     filters are usually symmetric about their center so that lag is
     exactly the center of the filter.
         Weighted Moving Averages (WMA) are FIR filters that are
     not symmetric about their center point. This gives them the
     advantage of having less lag.The outputof a 4-bar WMA is
    advantage of   y = (4x+ 3x[1]+ 2x[2]+x[3])/10   is

   so that the coefficients are 4, 3, 2, and 1. Discarding the first
   coefficient, we see that the second coefficient is equal to the
coefficient, we see that the second coefficient is equal to the

        Finite Impulse Response Filters
        Finite Filters
  sum of all the coefficients (excludingthe first).Therefore, a 4-bar
  WMA has a l-bar lag. As a second example,the outputof a 7-bar
  WMA is 1-bar lag. As a second example, the output of a 7-bar
WMA y = (7x+ 6x[1]+ 5x[2]+ 4x[3]+ 3x[4]+ 2x[5]+ x[6])/28

  I
   n this case, the coefficients are 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1. After dis-
  carding the first zero-lag coefficient, the sum of the next two
  coefficients is equal to half the total sum. Therefore, a 7-bar
  WMA has a lag of 2 bars.
      A big advantageof symmetrical FIR filters is that lag is con-
  stant regardless of the frequency of the signal being applied to
  the input of the filter. This means that there is no time distor-
  tion due to the filtering. The phase lag will be linear. Suppose
  the time lag is 4 bars. This means there is 180 degreesof phase
  lag to an 8-bar cycle period,90 degrees of phase lag to a 16-bar
  cycle period, and only 45 degrees of phase lag to a 32-bar cycle
  period.
      The phase lag that results from a WMA is nearly linear
  throughout the passband of the filter. One nice thing about the
  WMA is that higher-frequency components at andabove the
  critical band-pass frequency are delayed
        less than thefrequency
  components within the passband. This means that distortion
  tends to work in favor of the trader by delaying the higher-
  frequency wiggles lessthan thelag of the smoothed output.
      The truth is that many of the benefits ofFIR filters are
  unavailable to traders because the length of the filter must be
  relatively long to synthesize interesting passbands. As a result,
  the induced lag is prohibitive. However, we can perform some
  innovative tricks and put FIR filters to good use. For example, in
  Chapter 3 we showed how an SMA length can be adjusted to
  notch out undesiredfrequency components. Figure 3.5 is re-
  peated here as Figure 14.1to demonstrate this effect. The SMA
  has a notch in its frequency response for
        those cycle components
  having an integer number of cycles acrossthe width of the filter.
      An SMA is a FIR filter that has uniform amplitude coeffi-
  cients. The transfer response can be viewed as a rectangle over
  the finite duration of the filter. The Fourier Transform of this
  rectangle is a S i n ( X ) / Xdistribution, which is exactly what is dis-
rectangle is a distribution, which is exactly what is dis-

    146    Rocket Science for Traders
        I"



    CNA

  l


        Figure 14.1. Frequency response of a 12-bar SMA.
        Figure 14.1. Frequency response of a 12-bar SMA.

  played in Figure 14.1. The numerator of this function goes to
  zero each time X goes through a multiple of 180 degrees. If L is
  the length of the FIR filter and P is the period of the signal vari-
  able being applied to it, the frequency responseof the SMA FIR
  filter in rahanmeasure is frequency response of the SMA FIR
filter in radian measure is


        Hw) = P

     Note that theSin(X)/Xdistribution has lobes in theresponse
  between the notches. Smoothing the time-domain response can
  lower these lobes. This means we must taper the coefficients of
  the FIR filter. When we taper the coefficients of the filter, the
  end elements have a smaller contribution to thefiltering action
  than they do in the uniform amplitude case. The result is that
  there is less filtering action for a given length FIR-tapered filter
  when compared to theuniform amplitude coefficient caseof the
  SMA. We therefore have a trade-off between the degree of out-
  of-band filtering and the efficiency of filtering the passband. A
  number of amplitude tapers have been invented, each with a
  desired characteristic for out-of-band signal rejection. It is im-
desired characteristic for out-of-band signal rejection. It is im-

    Finite Impulse Response Filters    147
    Finite Impulse Response Filters    147










     Figure 14.2. Amplitude response of a three-element linearly tapered
     FIR filter. Amplitude response of a three-element linearly tapered
  practical for traders to employ these tapers, however, becauseof
  the additional lag inducedby passband inefficiency. Linear coef-
  ficient tapers are adequate for most trading applications.
      It might be instructive to examine the passband of several
  linearly tapered FIR filters. Starting with one of the shortest pos-
  sible, a three-element filter has a response of the shortest pos-
sible, a three-element y = (x+ 2x[l]+ x[2])/4

  The lag through this filter is just to thecenter of the filter, which
  i s 1 bar. Its amplitude response is shown in Figure 14.2.The nor-
is malized frequency corresponds to a 2-bar period. So this short
  filter is only useful for cancelingthe 2-bar cycle.
      The next longestFIR-tapered filter has four elements. Its
  response is longest FIR-tapered filter has four elements. Its
    response is    Y = (X + 2x[l]+ 2 ~ [ 2 ]
         + ~ [ 3 ] ) / 6

     The lag through this filter is 1.5 bars to the center of the filter.
     Its amplitude response is shown in Figure 14.3. The additional
     term has introduced a second null for a 3-bar cycleat a normal-
     ized frequency of 0.67. (The way to navigate between the nor-
     malized frequency and the cycleperiod   isto  divide the
  normalized frequency by 2 and then invert.) The cutofffre-
normalized frequency by 2 and then invert.) The cutoff fre-

  148 Rocket Science for Traders
148 Rocket Science for Traders
     I










        Figure 14.3.   Amplituderesponseofafour-elementlinearlytapered FIR
        filter.  Amplitude response of a four-element linearly tapered FIR
       quency, the point at which the amplitude response is -3   dB, is at
       a normalized frequency of about 0.33. Thiscorresponds to a 6-
    a  bar cycle.
                 Continuing our sequence of successively longer taperedFIR
       filters, the response of a 5-bar filter is       longer tapered FIR
    filters, the     Y = (x+ 2 x [ l]+ 3x[2]+ 2x[4]+ x[5])/9
  The lag of this filter-the + distance to its center-is 2 bars. The
   amplitude of this 5-bar taperedFIR filter is shown in Figure 14.4.
amplitude of this 5-bar tapered FIR filter is shown in Figure 14.4.







  t i
  Figure 14.4. Amplituderesponseofafive-elementlinearlytapered FIR
   filter. Amplitude response of a five-element linearly tapered FIR
filter.

        Finite Impulse Response Filters 149
        Finite Filters
  We can see that something interesting has happened. The can-
  cellation of the 2-bar cyclehas been lost. Although it is difficult
  to see on the large amplitude scale, the cutoff frequency has
  been reducedwhen compared to thatof the 4-bar filter, but not
  by much. This filter does not seem to be of much use.
     By contrast, a six-elementlinearly tapered FIR filter has some
  very interesting characteristics. Its time-domain response is
very Y = (x+ 2x[1]+ 3x[2]+ 3x[3]+ 2x[4]+ x[5])/12 is

  The lag through this filter is 2.5 bars to the center of the filter.
  Its amplitude response is shown in Figure 14.5.Not only has the
  cancellation of the 2-bar cycle periodreturned, but also the cut-
  off frequency has been reducedto about 0.2, a 10-bar cycle. Fur-
  thermore, the 3-bar and 4-bar cycles have been notched out by
  this filter. Attenuation between the notches is notuniform, but
  is nonetheless substantial. This isan excellent filter for general-
  purpose use by traders.
     We can now continue with our filter sequence. In so doing,
  we would find that we would preferto have an even number of
  elements in our tapered FIR filter so that thenormalized unity
  frequency, a 2-bar cycle,is always notched out. Longer and longer
  cycles constitute the passband as the length of the filter is in-
  creased, with the cutoff period beingabout 1.5 times the length
creased, with the cutoff period being about 1.5 times the length










  Figure 14.5. Amplitude response of a six-element linearly tapered FIR
  filter. 14.5. Amplitude response of a six-element linearly tapered FIR
filter.

         150        Rocket Science for Traders
    150             Rocket Science for Traders
         of the filter. Never forget that the lag of an N-length filter is
    of (N- 1)/2.Lag is the most crucial parameter of filter performance
         for a trader. the most crucial parameter of filter performance
    for a trader.
                    Key Points to Remember

   m A SimpleMovingAverage(SMA) is a Finite Impulse Re-
      sponse (FIR)
    *                filter with uniform amplitude filter coefficients.
   m Symmetrical FIR filters have no time distortion and, there-
      fore, havea linear phase delay.
   m The lag of a FIR filter is the center of gravity of the filter coef-
      ficients.
   m A Weighted Moving Average (WMA)has linear phase delay
      across its passband.
   m A WMA always has less lagoutside the passband than it has
* m for cyclecomponents within the passband. than it has
      A 4-bar WMA has a lag of 1 bar.
   m A 7-bar WMA has a lag of 2 bars.
   m A six-element symmetrically, linearly tapered FIR filter is
    *           one of trading’s most interesting and useful filters.
   m The passband periodof a symmetrically, linearly tapered FIR
      filter is approximately 1.5times the length of the filter.
    filter is approximately 1.5 times the length of the filter.

    Chapter 15

                   INFINITE IMPULSE
                   RESPONSE FILTERS

    Everyone is a child ofhis past.

    Everyone is a "EDNA G . ROSTOW

        —EDNA G. RosTow




  An Exponential Moving Average(EMA) is one example of an
  Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) filter. Spoken, these filters are
  almost always pronounced "eye-eye-are" filters. As the name
  implies, IIR filters ring out forever (intheory) after being stimu-
  lated by an impulse excitation, just like a bell. These filters are
  the digital equivalent of filters that can, and have, been designed
  and constructed from physical world components. As we show
  in Chapter 13, an EMA is one example of an IIR filter. The trans-
  fer responseof the EMA is shown to be IIR filter. The trans-
fer response of the EMA is shown
        H ( z )= a
        - (1- a)z"
        1

     Asopposed to the all-zero response of the FIR filter, the
  transfer response of the IIR filter is expressed as a rational frac-
  tion. When weexamine the Z Transform forthe filtered output,
  wecan understand why this produces the infinite impulse
  response. For the EMA, this is the infinite impulse
response. For the EMA, this is

        151
        151

     152                    Rocket Science for Traders
    152           Rocket Science for Traders
                     Y(2)
                                    = H(z)X(z)
                     Y(z)   -
                     =      -          aX(2)
                                 - ( 1- a)z"
                               1

     When wemultiply both sides of this equation by the denomina-
     tor on the right side, we obtain   equation by the denomina-
    tor on the   Y(2)
                 - (1- a)Y(z)z"
                     Y(2)= aX(2)
         Y(z) - 1 -            = aX(2)+ (1- a)Y(z)z"
  This equation says that thecurrent output depends not only on
  the current input, but also on the output one sample ago. That
  is, the calculation is recursive. This repeats for eachsubsequent
is, sample, so that thecurrent output always depends on all previ-
  ous outputs.
      The IIR filters are generally patterned after specific analog
  filter shapes such as Buttenvorth, Chebyshev, or Elliptic designs.
  Scaling and accuracy considerations are much more important
  for IIR filters than for FIR filters because the iterative calcula-
  tions compound rounding errors, and good judgment must be
  used to determine if a particular filter is practical given the
  number of bits available. We must give specialattention to limit
   cycles, which are low-level oscillations due to rounding errorin
   computation. As rounding errors are included in each recursion,
   the results can be cumulative. This kind of error causesparticu-
   lar trouble when using EasyLanguagebecause Tradestation
   rounds floating point calculations to 4 bits. If an IIR filter blows
   up on you, the problem maynot be a bug in your code,but may
   result from limit cycles. If this occurs, you must m o w the
   design. One thing you can do is compute the filter response in a
   Dynamic LinkedLibrary(DLL) that has beencompiled at a
   higher level of precision, and call up that DLL from your Easy-
   Language code.
      A pole is a zero of the denominator polynomial of a filter
   transfer response. The EMA has a single pole in its transfer
   response. More complex filters use alarger number of samples
   of previous outputs, and therefore have a higher-order polyno-
of mial in the denominator of the transfer response. From the
mial in the denominator of the transfer response. From the

          Infinite Impulse Response Filters                      153
          Infinite        Filters
  fundamental theorem of algebra, we know that this polyno-
  mial can be factored into zeros of the polynomial. Since the
  polynomial is in the denominator of the transfer response,
  these factors are called the poles of the response. These are the
  values of 2-l at which the transfer response blows up mathe-
  matically because the denominator is zero, giving an infinite
  result. This cannot happen in the filters because 2-l is con-
  strained tobe in integer numbers and the poles never occur at
  integer numbers in stable filters.Higher-order filters are called
  multipole filters.In trading, we are limited tojust a few polesto
  calculate IIR responsesbecauseeachpolenecessarilybrings
  additional lag. Without the lag consideration, we could theoret-
  ically continue to add an infinite number of poles to our filter
  design to create a stone-wall filter response at the critical period.
design to create a stone-wall filter response at the critical period.

                      Butterworth Filters

  There is ahost of multipole filter designs available.One of the
  more common multipole filter responses is called a Butter-
  worth filter. This filteris maximally smooth at zero frequency.
  That is, it has the highest number of derivatives that have a null
  value at zero frequency. The filtering advantage of using multi-
  pole Butterworth filters is shown in the comparison in Figure
  15.1. All three filters have a cutoff period at a 20-bar cycle. We
  clearly get more filtering with each increase in the number of
  poles.
     The low-frequency lag of Butterworth filters can be com-
     puted by the following equation:        filters can be com-
    puted by the following Lag = N *P I X z

      where N = number of poles in thefilter
    where   P = critical period of the filter
      The equations for a two-pole Butterworth filter in EasyLanguage
      notation are for a two-pole Butterworth filter in EasyLanguage
    notation are

    154    Rocket Science for Traders
    154    Rocket Science for Traders



        Pole          (EMA)
          0                         —

       5-10
       8-20
       < 25                     3 Pole
       © 30
        -35    5      10 15     20  5(45403530
                                    25
        -40    5   10    15  20    Cycle Period 40 45 50
                                Cycle Period
    Figure 15.1.      Comparison of Butterworth filters that have a 20-bar cutoff
    period.        Comparison of Butterworth filters that have a 20-bar cutoff
    period.





                                3 Pole
                                fe

                   |            4 NY(|
                                   Vit


  Figure 15.2. Responses for one-, two-, and three-pole filters having a
   14-bar cutoff. Increasing the number of poles increases the lag for a com-
  mon cutoff period. the lag for a com-
  Chart mated with Tra&Skztion2oOa @ by OmegaResearch,Inc.

Chart created with TradeStation2000i ® by Omega Research, Inc.

                 Infinite Impulse Response Filters    155
                 Infinite        Filters        155
          a = ExpValue(-1.414*3.14159/P);
          b = ~ * Q * C O S
                 (1.414*180/P);
          ~ = b * ~ [ 1 ] - ~ * ~ * ~ [ 2 ] + ( ( 1 - b + ~ * ~ ) / 4 ) * ( ~ + 2 * ~

         where P = cutoff period of the two-pole filter. The equations for
         a three-pole Butterworth filter in EasyLanguage notation are
    a            notation are
             Q = ExpValue(-3.14159/P);
             b = ~ * Q * C O S
          a  c = a*u; (1.738*180/P);
             y = ( b+ c)*y[l]- (c+ b*c)*y[2]+ c*c*y[3]
                 + ((1- b + c)*(l- c ) / ~ ) * ( x +
                 3 * ~ [ 1 ]     + 3 * ~ [ 2 ]
                 +~[3]);

         where P = cutoff period of the three-pole filter. The meritsof the
         higher-order filters are shown in Figures 15.2 and 15.3. Clearly,
         the higher-order filters offer greaterfidelity when the lag is held
         constant.    filters offer greater fidelity when the lag is held
    constant.


                                     ....

          . ..........    .....  14AN N  [ARN

                 Pi              M,

                                 ..............................................




   Figure 15.3. One- and three-pole filter responses when equalized for a
   2-bar lag. The higher order filter has greater fidelity when the lag is held
   constant.
   Chart mated with Tr&Skaation2000i@ by OmegaResmcb, Inc. the lag is held
Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

  156 Rocket Science for Traders
156
        Butterworth Filter Tables

  It is often easier to use a lookup table to get filter coefficients
  than uniquely calculate the coefficients eachtime they are used.
  In Tables 15.1and 15.2, the notation is defined as follows: A[O]is
  used with the current
        price data, A[n]is used with theprice data
  [n]bars ago, A[2] is used with price data 2 bars ago, and B[n] is
  used with the previously calculated filter output [n] bars ago.
  These tables are sure to make it easier to use higher-order filters.
These tables Gaussian and OtherLow-Lag Filters filters.


   The first objective of using smoothers is to eliminate or reduce
   the undesiredhigh-frequency components in the price data.
 the undesired high-frequency components in the price data.
   Table 15.1. lbo-Pole ButterworthFilter Coefficients
     AD1        A[O]     Butterworth Filter              BPI          BPI
     Period                                    m 1
        2      0.285784    0.571568            0.285784  -0.131366   -0.011770
     2 4       0.203973    0.407946            0.203973  0.292597    -0.108489
     4 6       0.130825    0.261650            0.130825  0.704171    -0.227470
        8      0.088501    0.177002            0.088501  0.975372    -0.329377
    0.063284
        10                 0.126567            0.063284  1.158161    -0.411296
     12 0.047322 0.094643 0.047322 1.287652 -0.476938
0.036654
        14                 0.073308            0.036654  1.383531    -0.530147
    0.029198   0.047322    0.058397            0.029198  1.457120    -0.573914
        16
        18     0.023793    0.047586            0.023793  1.515266    -0.610438
        20     0.019754    0.039507            0.019754  1.562309    -0.641324
        22     0.016658    0.033317            0.016658  1.601119    -0.667753
        24     0.014235    0.028470            0.014235  1.633667    -0.690607
     0.012303
        26
        0.024607
         0.012303
               1.661342
                -0.710555
    0.010739
        28                 0.021477            0.010739  1.685157    -0.728112
        30     0.009454    0.018908            0.009454  1.705862    -0.743678
        32     0.008386    0.016773            0.008386  1.724025    -0.757571
        34     0.007490    0.014980            0.007490  1.740086    -0.770045
        36     0.006729    0.013459            0.006729  1.754388    -0.781305
     0.006079
        38
        0.012158
         0.006079
               1.767204
     0.005518   -0.791520            0.006729            1.754388
        40
        0.011037
         0.005518
               1.778753
                -0.800827            0.006079            1.767204   -0.791520
     40     0.005518     0.011037    0.005518            1.778753   -0.800827

~ z $ G z ~ ~ z 2 % 2 ~ g ~ g k % % $ d
0 0 0 h u O h m m d d l + l + l + 0 0 0 0 0 C
h0mF4l+l+0000000000000C
l + + o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o c
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o c

    158    Rocket Science for Traders
    158    Rocket Science for Traders










    Figure 15.4. Lag of a three-pole Butterworth filter with a 10-bar period
    cutoff. Lag of a three-pole Butterworth filter with a 10-bar period

  Therefore, these smoothers are called low-pass filters, and they
  all work by some form of averaging. Butterworth low-pass filters
        A higher degreeof fil-
  can do this job, but nothing comes for free.
  tering is necessarily accompaniedby a larger amount of lag.We
  have cometo see that this is a fact of life.
      The downfall of most trading indicators, lag causesthe fail-
  ure to react to pricechanges in a timely manner. A better
  approach to filtering, therefore, is to minimize the lag and accept
  the resultant smoothing. The importance of lag (group delay is
  an engineer’s wayof saying lag, which distinguishes lag fromthe
  phase delay through the filter) is demonstrated in Figure 15.4.
  This illustrates the lag of a three-pole Butterworth filter that
  attenuates cycles shorter than 10bars.
      The low-frequency lag of a Butterworth filter can be esti-
  mated by the following equation, where N is the number of
  poles in the filter and P is the longest cycleperiod to pass
  through the filter: P is the longest cycle period to pass
through the filter:

    Infinite Impulse Response Filters    159
    Infinite    Filters        159
        Lag = N*P/.”

     The lag story gets worse asthe frequency components of the
  input waveform get closer to the band edge of the filter. The
  higher-frequency components within the passband of the filter
  are actually delayed more thanthe lower-frequencycompo-
  nents. This is exactly the opposite of what a trader desires. We
  have to react more quickly to rapid changes in themarket, and
  we therefore prefer a smoothing filter that has less lag with the
  higher-frequency components.
     A Gaussian filter is one whose transfer response is described
  by the familiar Gaussian bell-shaped curve. In the case of low-
  pass filters, only the upper half of the curve describes the filter.
  The use of Gaussian filters is a move towardachieving the dual
  goals of reducing lag and reducing
        the lag of high-frequency com-
  ponents relative to the lag of lower-frequency components. We
  can construct multipole Gaussian filters that provide a desired
  degree of smoothing. The group delay of a three-pole Gaussian
  filter having a 0.1 cycle per day passband
        is shown in Figure 15.5
  for comparisonto thedelay produced bya Butterworth filter.
     For an equivalent number of poles, the lag of a Gaussian filter
  is about half the lag of a Butterworth filter. More important, the
is higher-frequency components have even less lag than the low-
  frequency components. With Gaussianfilters, the lag (asa func-
  tion of frequency) goesin theright directionfor traders-decreased
  lag.However, a Gaussian filter has about half the smoothing
  effectiveness as an equivalently sized Butterworth filter. A four-
  pole Gaussianfilter has about the same smoothing performance
  as a two-pole Butterworth filter. Thus, performing the same
  amount of filtering, these two filters have about the same low-
  frequency lag, but the Gaussian filter preserves the original price
  function with greater fidelity because
        the higher-frequency com-
  ponents within the passband are not delayed as much as those
  within the Butterworth filter. Comparative filter responses of a
  two-pole Butterworth filter and a two-pole Gaussian filter, each
  having a 10-bar cycle passband, are
        shown in Figure 15.6.
      There is no magic to the Gaussian filter. It can be defined
  simply as the multiple application of an Exponential Moving
  Average (EMA).The transfer responseof an EMA is Moving
Average (EMA). The transfer response of an EMA is

     160    Rocket Science for Traders
    160    Rocket Science for Traders
         H(z)=     a
         - (1
         1                - a)z"

     Applying the EMA N times gives us an N-pole Gaussian filter
     transfer response expressed
         by the following equation:     filter
    transfer response expressed by the following equation:

         o                     N
  At zero frequency,z" = 1because the Z Transform of a function
  is just the function itself at zero frequency. Therefore,this low-
is pass filter gain is unity. Also, the denominator assumes the
  value of aNat zero frequency.The cutoff frequency of the filter
  is defined asthat point where the transfer response is down by
is 3 dB, or 0.707 in amplitude. If the transfer response is down by3
3 dB, then the denominator, the only term that is a function of
dB, then the denominator, the only term that is a function of










     !




     Figure 15.5. Lag of a three-pole Gaussianfilter with a 10-bar period cutoff,
    Figure 15.5.  Lag ofa three-pole Gaussian filter with a 10-bar period cutoff.

    Infinite Impulse Response Filters    161
    Infinite Impulse Response Filters    161



    “Th MN [halk
    Vic
    Pi


    4
    MN






     Figure 15.6 Comparisonof two-pole filtersillustratesthat theGaussian filter has
     much less lag than the Butterworth filter.
                                             The Gaussian filter has less smoothing.
     Chartmated with TradeStation2000i@ by Omega Research,Inc.   has less smoothing.
    Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.
     frequency, must be up by3 dB, or 1.414in amplitude. When this
     occurs, weobtain the following relationship:                When this
    occurs, we obtain (1- (1- a)~")"
         = 1.414aN

  where z" = e-'" and co = 27$? Crunching through the complex
  arithmetic, we arrive at thesolution for alpha as complex
arithmetic, we arrive a = -p + SQR(p2+ 2p) as

     where p = (1- cos (a))/(
         1.4142'N- 1).     2p)

                           We can use this generalized solution for alpha to compute
     the coefficients forany order Gaussian filter. And, becausez"                is
     synonymous with a l-bar lag, we can easily use EasyLanguage
     code to form equations from the N-pole transfer response forthe
     output.                     equations from the N-pole transfer response for the
    output.

162
162                              Science for Traders
       One pole:       y = ax +  (1- a)y[l]
       Two poles:      y = a2x+ 2(1 - a)y[l]- (1- ~ t ) ~ y [ 2 ]
       Three poles:    y = a3x+ 3(1 - a)y[l]- 3(1- a)zy[2]+ (1- ~x)~y[3]
       Four poles:     y = a4x+ 4(1 - a)y[l]- 6(1 - c~)~y[2]
Four poles:             + 4(1 - a)3y[3]- (1- a)4y[4]
                                     - 1

                              Gaussian Filter Tables

As we have seen in terms of the Butternorth filter, it is often
easier to consult a lookuptable to get filter coefficients than it is
to calculate the coefficients each time they are used. In Tables
15.3-15.6, column A lists the price data coefficient andcolumn
B lists thepreviously calculatedfilter output [n]bars ago.
B lists the         Table 15.3.   One-Pole Gaussian Filter ( E M ) ago.
                       Period      N O 1     Filter BPI
                         2        0.828427          0.171573
                     2   4        0.732051          0.267949
                     4   6        0.618034          0.381966
                         8        0.526602          0.473398
                         10       0.455887          0.544113
                         12       0.400720          0.599280
                         14       0.356896          0.643104
                         16       0.321416          0.678584
                         18       0.292186          0.707814
                         20       0.267730          0.732270
                         22       0.246990          0.753010
                         24       0.229192          0.770808
                         26       0.213760          0.786240
                         28       0.200256          0.799744
                         30       0.188343          0.81       1657
                         32       0.177759          0.822241
                         34       0.168294          0.83       1706
                         36       0.159780          0.840220
                         38       0.152082          0.847918
                         40       0.145089          0.854911

                    40            0.145089   0.854911

                               163
  Table 15.4.   Two-PoleGaussianFilterCoefficients
  Period        At01       BPI          B121
    2           0.834615   0.172854  -0.007470
 2  4           0.722959   0.299460  -0.022419
 4  6           0.578300   0.479080  -0.057379
 6    8         0.457577   0.647112  -0.104688
 8  10          0.365017   0.791668  -0.156684
10  12          0.295336   0.913103  -0.208439
12  14          0.242632   1.014847  -0.257479
14  16          0.202250   1.100556  -0.302806
16  18          0.170835   1.173357  -0.344192
18  20          0.146017   1.235757  -0.381774
20  22          0.126125   1.289719  -0.415844
22  24          0.109966   1.336777  -0.446743
24    26        0.096680   1.378133  -0.474813
26  28          0.085633   1.414738  -0.500371
28  30          0.076357   1.447346  -0.523703
30  32          0.068496   1.476567  -0.545063
32  34          0.061779   1.502894  -0.564672
34  36          0.055996   1S26729   -0.582726
36  38          0.050984   1S48408   -0.599392
38  40          0.046612   1S68205   -0.614817
40        0.046612     1.568205     -0.614817

Table 15.5.   Three-Pole Gaussian Filter Coefficients
Period        At01 Gaussian W 1           BPI        ~ [ 3 1
   2          0.836701    0.173094    -0.009987     0.000192
 2 4          0.718670    0.312814    -0.032617     0.001134
4  6          0.558792    0.529009    -0.093283     0.005483
   8          0.422292    0.749259    -0.187130     0.015579
  10          0.318295    0.951680    -0.301899     0.031923
  12          0.242068    1.130321    -0.425875     0.053486
  14          0.186612    1.285644    -0.550960     0.078704
  16          0.146016    1.420251    -0.672371     0.106104
  18          0.115940    1.537154    -0.787614     0.134520
  20          0.093340    1.639147    -0.895601     0.163114
  22          0.076111    1.728632    -0.996056     0.191313
  24          0.062791    1.807607    -1.089148     0.218750
  26          0.052354    1.877714    -1.175270     0.245202
  28          0.044075    1.940297    -1.254918     0.270546
  30          0.037432    1.996460    -1.328618     0.294726
                                          1
  32          0.032045     2.047111   -1.396887     0.3 1773
  34          0.027635    2.093000    -1.460217     0.339582
  36          0.023991    2.134754    -1.519058     0.360313
  38          0.020956    2.172895    -1.573824     0.379973
  40          0.018409    2.207865    -1.624889     0.398615

40      0.018409     2.207865     -1.624889     0.398615

              Infinite        Filters                             165
 Table 15.6.      Four-PoleGaussianFilterCoefficients
  BD1         A[O] Gaussian Filter           BPI      ~ 3  1      BPI
 Period
       2    0.837747            0.173178  -0.011247   0.000325  0.000004
  2    4    0.716200            0.320247  -0.038459   0.002053  0.000041
  4    6    0.547128            0.559812  -0.117521   0.010965  0.000384
       8    0.400596            0.817734  -0.250758   0.034176  0.001747
0.289459
      10                        1.066023  -0.426152   0.075715  0.005045
      12    0.209659
              1.293310
                -0.627244
                0.135204
                0.010929
0.153408
      14                        1.496649  -0.839984   0.209527  0.019599
0.113779  0.209659              1.676861  -1.054449   0.294694  0.030885
      16  0.153408              1.836187  -1.264344   0.386929  0.044405
0.085632
      18  0.113779              1.977213  -1.466015   0.483104  0.059700
0.065397
      20
      22    0.050648            2.102418  -1.657560   0.580814  0.076320
      24    0.039744            2.214012  -1.838193   0.678297  0.093860
0.031571
      26                        2.313903  -2.007804   0.774311  0.111980
      28    0.025363            2.403709  -2.166681   0.868012  0.130403
      30    0.020589            2.484797  -2.315331   0.958854  0.148910
      32    0.016875            2.558316  -2.454368   1.046508  0.167331
      34    0.013953            2.625237  -2.584450   1.130799  0.185538
      36    0.011632            2.686378  -2.706235   1.211662  0.203436
0.009770
      38                        2.742435  -2.820356   1.289107  0.220956
0.008263  0.011632              2.794000  -2.927413   1.363199  0.238049
      40  0.009770
 40       0.008263     2.794000 -2.927413        1.363199      0.238049

  166 Rocket Science for Traders
166 Key Points to Remember
     An Exponential MovingAverage ( E M )is an Infinite Impulse
* Response (IIR)filter, having onlyone pole in itsresponse.
     Classical filter types, such as Buttenvorth, Chebyshev, and
     Gaussian are IIR filters.
     Lagof an IIR filter is nonlinear as a function of input fre-
     quency.
     Low-frequency lagof a Buttenvorth filter is N*P/7c2. fre-
* Gaussian filters have the least lag of all the multipole fil-
* ters. The low-frequency lag is approximately half the low-
     frequency lagof an equivalently sized Butterworth filter.
      Calculations involving IIR filters canblow up due to the
      cumulative effect of rounding errors in thecomputation.
    cumulative effect of rounding errors in the computation.

                  Chapter 16

                                                          REMOVING LAG

                                                   Money isa terrible master
                  but an excellent servant.
              but an           "P.T. BARNUM
                             —P.T. BARNUM

In 1960, R.E. Kalman introduced the concept of optimum esti-
mation. Since then, his technique has proven to be a powerful
and practical tool. The approach it utilizes is particularly well-
suited for optimizing the performance of modern terrestrial and
space navigation systems. Many traders not directly involved in
system analysis have heard about Kalman filtering andhave
expressed interest in learning more about applying it to the mar-
ket. Although attempts have been madeto provide simple,intu-
itive explanations,none has been completely successful.Almost
without exception, descriptions have become mired in the jar-
gon and state-space notation of the cult.
      In spite of the obscure-looking mathematics (themost impen-
etrable of which can be found  in Dr. Kalman's original paper),
Kalman filteringis a surprisingly direct and
                                   simple concept.I
                                                             nthe
spirit of pragmatism, wewill not deal with thefull-blown matrix
equations that a thoroughexplanation     of Kalmanfilteringre-
quires, and we
             will be lessthan rigorous in itsapplication to trad-
  ing. Rigorous application requires knowledge of the probability
                               dntributions of the statistics. Nonetheless, we endwith practical
and useful results.
              We depart fromthe classical approach by work
    ing backward from Exponential Moving Averages ( E m s ) .With
ing backward from Exponential Moving Averages (EMAs). With

                  167
                  167

     this process, we introduce a method to achieve a nearly zero-lag
     moving average. From
         there, we develop an automatic trading sys-
     tem based onthe zero-lag principle.
                                         an automatic trading sys-
    tem based on the zero-lag principle.

                          Suboptimal Filters

     Tracking filters use a linear model to estimate the position of a
     target. The classic exampleis a gunner shooting at an enemy tar-
     get. He estimates the angle of his gun and shoots. The forward
     foot soldiers radio back
                                how much deviation there was from the
     target. The gunner computes the incremental change required
     for his new gun angle fromthe deviation. An Alpha filter shows
     that this model constitutes using the previous estimate plus a
     constant times the difference between the last real position and
     the last estimate. The equation for this filter is  position and
    the last estimate.  XA=X"[1]+a(Z-X"[1])
     where X" = estimated next position  XM1))
    where X* 2 = last real position
     This isexactly the same as the EMA with which you are famil-
     iar. Let us rearrange the termsso that theEMA is written as
    iar. Let us     EMA = a*Price+ (1- a)*EMA[l]     as

  As you know,this EMA equation produces a lag in theestimated
  price. We can improveour estimate of position by addingan esti-
  mate of the velocity to the last known position. The position
  equation then becomes last known position. The position
equation then becomes
     where V" = velocity estimate +      -
    where V* K = gain factor
         K = gain factor

        169
  The velocity estimate is an EMAof the rate of change of posi-
  tion, so that is an EMA of the rate of change of posi-
tion, so that V" = V"[ l]+ p(v - V"[ l])

  This is the Beta part of an Alpha-Beta filter. An Alpha-Beta filter
  considers not only the change of position, but also the change of
  velocity. In trading terms, an Alpha-Beta filter not only consid-
  ers the price, but also the change of price (momentum).

  p = We can create a near-zero-lagfilter for the special case where
      1. I
        nthis case, the EMA can be written as case where
B = ZEMA = a*(Price+ K* (Price- Price[3]))+ (1- a)*ZEMA[l]

  where ZEMA is the zero-lag EMA. I took the liberty of using the
  three-day momentum as the velocity estimate. Figure 16.1 shows
three-day momentum as the velocity estimate. Figure 16.1 shows






    Ag  TN










  Figure 16.1. ZeroLag moving average compared to standardEMA with a = 0.25.
  Chart createdwith Tradesttion2000i@ byOmega Research,Inc. EMA with o = 0.25.
Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

           Rocket Science for Traders
     an EMA using a = 0.25 compared to a ZEMA using the same
     alpha andK = 0.5. This is not a bad zero-lag filter, even
                                                         if it is sub-
     optimal. It is suboptimal because it is not a true Kalman filter.
optimal. It is suboptimal because it is not a true Kalman filter.
           ZeroLag Trading System

 The concepts of the Instantaneous Trendline and the ZeroLag
        these
        To demonstrate just how profound
 EMA are very powerful.
  concepts are,I designed an intraday trading system and appliedit
  to one of the more exciting and challengingcontracts that exist
  today-the S&P futures. An intruday trade is definedas any
  active trade that is traded andthen closed at the end of the day.
  Figure 16.2 illustrates the back-tested results of the S&P futures
Figure 16.2 illustrates the back-tested results of the S&P futures
        1
     Total Net Profit  $146,450.00
     Gross Profit      $336,937.50   Gross Loss           ($190,487.50)
     Total # of trades         283   Percent profitable         50.18%
     Number winning            142   Number losing                 141
       trades                         trades
     Largest winning    $15,000.00   Largest losing         ($1,512.50)
       trade                          trade
     Average winning     $2,372.80   Average losing         ($1,350.98)
       trade                          trade
     Ratio avg win/           1.76   Avg trade                 $517.49
       avg loss       1.76            (win tk loss)        $517.49
     Max consec.                 7   Max consec.                     9
       Winners                        losers
     Avg # bars in       7       7    losers
       winners                       Avg # bars in                 9 4
      Max intraday
       drawdown  ($17,650.00)        losers     in                4
      Profit Factor          l .77   Max # contracts                  1
    Profit Factor     1.77            held                        1
        held
  Figure 16.2. ZeroLag performancesummary on SW intraday-lJanuary
  1997 to 7June 2000. performance summary on S&P intraday—I January
 1997 to 7 June 2000.

        Removing Lag 171
        171
  market from 1 January 1997 to 7
  management stop was used. June 2000. A $1,500 money-
        The results included an average in-
  come over $40,000 per year percontract at anaverage profit per
  trade of $5 17, and slightly more than half of all trades were prof-
  itable! This system trades an average of 1.5 times a week. The
  new part of the code (afterthe Hilbert calculations, with which
  you are familiar) starts where I set yesterday’shighandlow,
  computed by sequentially capturing the highest highand the
  lowest low today.The ZEMA is computed using a gain factorof
  0.5. Now the trading rules come into play.
     Rule number one demands an outside day forany trade to be
  taken. That is, either the highest high today must be higherthan
  yesterday’s high or the lowest low today must be lowerthan yes-
  terday’s low.Next, a new position is entered only on the second
  bar of the day. A new position is established by the condition
  that theMarketPosition equals zero (Flat Position).Then, on the
  second bar of the day, if the ZeroLag line is above the Instanta-
  neous Trendline and the filter conditions are met, a long posi-
  tion isestablished.The filter conditions are as follows:The open
  of the second barmust be greaterthan theopen of the first; the
  high of the second barmust be higherthan thehigh of the first;
  and the close of the first bar must be in the upper two-thirds of
  its range. A similar rule exists for the short side trade. That is,
  the open of the second barmust be less than theopen of the first;
  the low of the second barmust be lowerthan the low of the first;
  and the close of the first bar must be in the lower two-thirds of
  its range. Also, a crossover rule exists for all bars. If you find that
  the following set of conditions is met, then buy: The ZeroLag
  crosses overthe Instantaneous Trendline, the high of the current
  bar is less than thehigh of the previous one, andthe close of the
  current bar is in the upper half of the range of the bar. If this set
  of conditions is met, then sell: The ZeroLag crosses under the
  Instantaneous Trendline, the low of the current bar is greater
  than thelow of the previous one, and
        the close of the current bar
  is in thelower half of the range of the bar.
is The complete code to achieve this performance is given in
  Figure 16.3. There is not a lot of new code. The majority of the
  code is used to compute the Instantaneous Trendline. We use an
code is used to compute the Instantaneous Trendline. We use an

172           Rocket Science for Traders
172           Rocket Science for Traders

       Inputs: Price( (H+L) ,/2)
              alpha ( .33);
Inputs:
       Vars:  Smooth(O),
              Detrender(0),
Vars:
        Detrender (0),
        11(0),
        Q1(0),


       12(0),
       Q2(0),
       Re (0),
        SmoothPeriod(01 ,
        SmoothPrice(0 ,
        DCPeriod(0),       (0),
        RealPart (0),
        ImagPart(0),
        count(0),
        ITrend( 01 ,
        Trendline(0),
        ZeroLag( 01 ,
        Ht (0),           (0),
        Lt ( 0 1 ,  ,
        Yh(O),
        Yl(0) ;

        {Initialize        ZeroLag}
        If           CurrentBar= 5     then  begin
                       ZeroLag =  (H+L)      /2;
        End;            =
                        =      (H+L)/2;
    If  CurrentBar>  5  then          begin
If      Smooth =     (4*Price +       3*Price[ll  + 2*Price[2] +
    Price[3]) / 10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
    .5769*Smooth[4] - .0962*SmoothL611 * ( .075*
    Period[l] + .54);
                                  -              (continued)
                     +  .54);
                                                 (continued)
       Figure 16.3. ZeroLag Intraday Trading SystemEasyLanguage code.
    Figure 16.3.    ZeroLag Intraday Trading System EasyLanguage code.

                             Removing Lag                        173

                        Removing Lag                  173

  {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
  Q1 = ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrendert21 -
    .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender[6l ) *
    Ql = (   .075*Period      [l]+  .54);               -
  I1 = Detrender[3] ; -
        + .54);
  {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
  jI = (.0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
    .0962*11[6]) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .S41;
  jQ = ( .0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1t41 -
    .0962*Q1[6]) * ( .075*Period[l] + .54);
    JQ =                +                    -          -
  {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)}
  I2 = I1 - jQ;
  Q2 = Q1 + jI; for 3 bar averaging)}
       =          -
Q2 {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
       I2 =   .2*12 +   .8*12       [l];          before applying
       Q2 =   .2*Q2 +   .8*Q2       [l];
       =           +
Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
  Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
  Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
  Re = .2*Re + .8*Re[l];
  Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
  If Im c > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
    3 6 + O/ArcTangent( Im/Re);
  If Period> 1.5*Period[l] then Period=
            1.5*Period       [l];   ;
  If Periodc .67*Period[l] then Period=
     .67*Period [l];
       If    Periodc  6      then   Period=       6;    =
  If Period> 50 then Period= 50;
  Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[l] ;
  SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
              =                    +
   {Compute Trendlineas simple average over the
    measured dominant cycle period}
  DCPeriod = IntPortion(SmoothPeriod + - 5 ) ;
        (continued)
DCPeriod = IntPortion(SmoothPeriod + .5);
        (continued)
        Figure 16.3. (Continued).
        Figure 16.3. (Continued).

174                  Rocket Science for Traders
174                   Rocket Science for Traders

    ITrend = 0;
    For count= 0 to DCPeriod- 1 begin
    = ITrend = ITrend + Price [count]
    ;
       End;     =                         -
    If DCPeriod> 0 then ITrend= ITrend / DCPeriod;
    Trendline = (4*ITrend + 3*ITrend[ll + 2*
    ITrend[2] + ITrendL31) / 10;
    If CurrentBar c 12 then Trendline= Price;

    If {Set yesterday's high and low Price;
    If Datec > Date[ll then begin
    If Date Ht = High;
    Lt = Low; then begin
    Yh = Ht [l]
    ;
    Y1 = Lt [l]
    ;
    End; = Lt(1];
    {Establish today's high and low}
    If High Ht then Ht = High;
    If If Lowc Lt then Lt= = Low;
    If {Compute zero lag filter}
    ZeroLag = alpha*(Price + .5*(Price - Price[31)) +
    (1 - alpha) *ZeroLag ;[l]
            =                                         - Price(3])) +
    {Demand an outside day to trade}
    If Date>= 0 and (Ht >= Yh or Lt C = Y1) then
    If begin
    begin {New positions are entered at the end of
    of the day}
    the second bar
    If Date= Date[ll and Date> Date[2] and
    If MarketPosition = 0 then begin
    If ZeroLag> Trendline and Open>
    Open [l] and High>
                      If   Close 1                    High [11 and
    11 > Low 111 + (High[l] -
    Low[ll) / 3 then buy;
    If ZeroLagc Trendline and OpenC
    Open [l] and Lowc
    If Close [l]c High[l]Low- [l] and
    (High[l] -
    Low[ll) / 3 then sell;
            End;          Low(1])/  3           -          -
        End;                             then  sell;     (continued)
                                                      (continued)
                          Figure 16.3.   (Continued).
                 Figure 16.3.       (Continued).

                            Removing Lag                        175

                            Removing Lag        175

        If ZerOLag Crosses Over Trendline and High
        c High[l] and Close > Low + (High -
        If Low)/2 then buy;
        If ZeroLag Crosses Under Trendline and LOW
        > Low[l] and Close > High - (High -
        If Low)/2 thensell;
            End ;   >           >       High -  (High -
       End :        Low)/2  then sell;

  End;
        Figure 16.3. (Continued).
        Figure 16.3. (Continued).
  additional input-the alpha used in the ZeroLag EMA. I
        n this
  case, I assigned a value of 0.33 to alpha, correspondingto a 2-bar
  lag if the EMA lag was not removed. corresponding to a 2-bar
lag if the EMA lag was not removed.
        Key Points to Remember

        Exponential Moving Average (EMA)lag can be removed by
    *   adding a short-term momentumfactor times a gain term to
        the current price in theEMA equation.
        A ZeroLag EMA is similar to a Kalman filter with a constant
        gain.
        The theoretical Instantaneous Trendline and ZeroLag Indica-
        tors are powerfultools even for demandingintraday trading.

       tors are powerful tools even for demanding intraday trading.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

    Chapter 17

    l”A-THE  MOTHER OF
  ADAPTIVE MOVING AVERAGES

 Think likea man of action,
 act like a man ofthought.
act like -HEW-LOUIS BERGSON

    —HENRI-LOUIS BERGSON


  We have already encountered one method to make Finite Im-
  pulse Response(FIR) filters adaptive-setting the cutofffre-
  quency to be some multiplier times the measured cycle period.
  In certain special cases, the length of the Simple Moving Aver-
  age (SMA) is set not only to smooth, but also to specifically
  notch out, some undesired frequency components. The Instan-
  taneous Trendline is one such example. We can produce a much
  faster response to changes if we introduce nonlinearity into an
  Infinite Impulse Response (IIR)filter calculation. Nonlinearities
  usually depend on price volatility. We briefly describe several
        of
  these approaches before applying the Hilbert Transform for a
     unique approach. applying the  Hilbert Transform for a
    unique approach.
     Kauhan’s Adaptive Moving Average

  Kaufman’s Adaptive Moving Average ( K A M A ) is based on the
  concept that a noisy market requires a slower trend than one
concept that a noisy market requires a slower trend than one

         177
         177

     178             Rocket Science for Traders
    178             Rocket Science for
     with less noise.' The basic principle is that thetrendline must
     lag further behind the price in a relatively noisy market to avoid
     being penetrated by the price. The moving averagecan speed up
     when the prices move consistently in one direction. According
     to Perry Kaufman,who invented the system, KAMA is intended
     to use the fastest trend possible, based on the smallest calcula-
     tion period for the existing market conditions. It does this by
     changing the alpha of the EMA with eachnew     sample. The
     equation for KAMA i s     EMA with each new sample.     The
    equation for    KAMA = S*Price+ (1- S)*KAMA[l]

     where S = smoothing factor. This is exactly the same equation
     that we use for the Exponential MovingAverage ( E M )except
     the variable S replaces the alpha constant of the EMA.
              The equation for the smoothing factor involves two bound-
     aries andan efficiency ratio.    factor involves two bound-
    aries and an    S = (E*(fastest- slowest)+ slowestj2

  Fastest refers to thealpha of the shortestperiod boundary. Slow-
  est refers to thealpha of the longest period boundary. The sug-
  gested period boundariesare 2 and 30 bars. In this case, the two
  alphas are calculated to be 2 and 30 bars. In this case, the two
    alphas are       Fastest = 2/(2+ 1)= 0.6667
                    Slowest = 2/(30 + 1)= 0.0645

     Simpllfying the equation for the smoothing factor, we get
    Simplifying the  S = (0.6022*E+ 0.0645)'    we get

     The efficiencyratio (E)is theabsolute value of the difference
  of price across the calculation span divided by the sum of the
of price across the calculation span divided by the sum of the
  'Kaufman, Perry J.Zhding Systems and Methods. 3rd ed. New York
      John Wiley & Sons, 1998.    and Methods. 3rd ed. New York:
    John Wiley & Sons, 1998.

              MAMA-The    Mother of AdaptiveMovingAverages     179
              MAMA—The Mother of                               179
      absolute value of the individual price differences acrossthe cal-
      culation span. The equation for E is     across the cal-
    culation span. TheE =     [Price- Price[N](
        |Price — Price[N]|
        >" |Priceli] — Pricefi + 1
  The default value for N is 10. However,testing to find the best
  length is suggested. is 10. However, testing to find the best
length is suggested.
        Variable Index Dynamic Average

      Variable IndexDynamic Average (VIDYA)uses a pivotal smooth-
      ing constant that isfixed.2The suggested value of this constant
      is 0.2, corresponding to thealpha of a nine-day EMA. The equa-
    is tion for VIDYA is  to the alpha of a nine-day EMA. The equa-
    tion for          VIDYA = 0.2*k*Close+ (1- 0.2*k)*VIDYA[l]

   Again, this is exactly the same equation as an E M A except the
   relative volatility term k has been included to introduce the
   nonlinearity. The volatility term is the ratio of the standard
   deviation of Closes overthe last n days to thestandard deviation
   of Closes over the last m days, where m is greater than n. Sug-
 of gested values aren = 9 and m = 30. m is greater than n. Sug-
 gested values are n=9 and m = 30.
        MESA Adaptive Moving Average-a..k.a “A

       Forgive the whimsy of the name Iattached to thisunique indi-
       cator, but with that
                                 name I’m sure you will always rememberit.
       Like KAMA and VIDYA, the starting point for “A is a con-
     Like KAMA and VIDYA, the starting point for MAMA is a con-

       2Chande,lbshar S., and Stanley Kroll. The New Technical Trader. New
       York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994. The New Technical Trader. New
     York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.

     180          Rocket Science for Traders
    180        Rocket Science for Traders
    ventional Exponential MovingAverage (EMA).The equation for
     an EMA is writtenas  Average (EMA). The equation for
    an EMA is    EMA = a*Price+ (1- a)*EMA[l]

  where a is less than 1. In English, this equation says that the
  EMA is comprised of taking a fraction of the current price and
  adding one minus that fraction times the previous value of the
  EMA. The larger the value of a,the more responsive the EMA
  becomes to thecurrent price. Conversely, if a becomes smaller,
  the EMA is more dependent on previous values of the average
  rather than the current price. Therefore,a way to make an EMA
  adaptive is to vary the value of a according to some independent
  parameter.
      The concept of MAMA is to relate the phase rate of change
  to the EMA alpha, thus making the EMA adaptive. The cycle
to phase goes from0 through 360 degrees in each cycle. The phase
  is continuous, but is usually drawn with the snap back to 0
is degrees as the beginning of each cycle. Thus the phase rate of
   change is 360 degrees per cycle.
        The shorter the cycle, the faster
  the phase rate of change. For example,a 36-bar cyclehas a phase
  rate of change of 10 degrees per bar, while a 10-bar cyclehas a
   rate of change of 36 degrees per bar.The cycle periodstend to be
   longer when the market is in a Trend Mode.
      The cycle phaseis computed from the arctangent of the ratio
   of the Quadrature component to the Inphase component. I
of obtain the phase rate of change valuesby taking the difference of
   successive phase measurements. The arctangent function only
   measures phase over a half cycle, from -90 degrees to +90 de-
   grees. Sincethe phase measurement snaps back every half cycle,
   a huge negative rate change of phase every half cycle results
a from the computation of the rate change of phase. Measured
   negative rate changes of phase can also occurwhen the market
   is in a Trend Mode. Any negative rate change of phase is theo-
is retically impossible becausephase must advanceas time in-
   creases. We therefore limit allrate change of phase to be noless
   than unity.
      The alpha in MAMA is allowed to range between a maxi-
   mum and minimum value, these values being established as
mum and minimum value, these values being established as

        MAMA-The Mother of AdaptiveMovingAverages 181
        MAMA—The Mother of 181
  inputs. The suggested maximum value is FastLimit = 0.5, and
  the suggested minimum isSlowLimit = 0.05. The variable alpha
  is computed as the FastLimitdivided by the phase rate of
is change. Any time there is a negative phase rate of change, the
  value of alpha is set to the FastLimit. If the phase rate of change
  is large, the variable alpha is bounded at theSlowLimit.
is -90 The arctangent function produces a phase responsebetween
       degreesand +90 degrees, with a phase wrap back to -90
  degrees. There is a huge negativerate change of phase acrossthis
  phase wrap boundary. By limiting this negative rate change of
  phase to +l, the alpha used in theE M A is set to the FastLimit.
  The phase wrap boundary occurs
        at 0 degrees and180 degrees of
  a theoretical sine wave due to the 90-degree lag of the Hilbert
a Transform.
      The variable alpha is guaranteed to be set to the FastLimit
   every half cycledue to themeasured phase snap back.This rela-
   tively large value of alpha causes"Ato rapidly approachthe
  price. After the phase snaps back, the alpha returns toa typically
   small value. The small value of alpha causes MAMA to hold
   nearly the value it achieved when alpha was at the FastLimit.
   This switching between the relatively large andrelatively small
   values of alpha producethe ratcheting action that you observein
   the waveform. The ratcheting occurs less often when the mar-
   ket is in the Trend Mode because the cycle period is longer in
   these cases.
      An interesting set of indicators result if the "A is
   applied to the first MAMA line toproduce a Following Adaptive
   Moving Average (FAMA).
        By using an alpha in FAMA that ishalf
   the value of the alpha in MAMA, the FAMA has steps in time
   synchronization with " A , but the vertical movement is
   not as great. As a result, MAMA and FAMA do not cross unless
   there has been a major changein market direction. This suggests
   an adaptive moving average crossover system that is virtually
   free of whipsaw trades.
      The "Acode is shown in Figure 17.1. This code is nearly
   the same as the one that computes the Hilbert Transform
   Homodyne Discriminator cycle measurement (see Chapter 7,
   Figure 7.2),with the additional code to compute phase rate of
   change, the nonlinear alpha, and the MAMA and FAMA lines.
 change, the nonlinear alpha, and the MAMA and FAMA lines.

182                      Rocket Science for Traders
182                    Rocket Science for Traders

       Inputs:        Price( (H+L)/2),
Inputs:               FastLimit( .5),
                      SlowLimit( .05);

       Vars : Smooth( 0 ) ,     (.05);
            Detrender( 0 ) ,
Vars:       I1( 0 1 ,
            Q1( 0 1 ,  (0),
            jI ( 0 )  ,
            jQ(O),
            12( 0 1 ,
            Q2 ( 0 1 ,
            Re ( 0 1 ,
            Im(O),
            Period ( 0 ) ,
            Smoothperiod( 0 ) ,
            Phase( 0 ) ,
            DeltaPhase ( 0 ) ,
            alpha ( 0 ) ,
            " A ( 0 )  ;
            F W ( 0 ) ;

       If  CurrentBar>       5  then     begin
If          Smooth =     (4*Price +        3*Price[ll + Z*Price [2]+
    Price[3]) / 10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
    .5769*Smooth [41- .0962*Smooth [61)*
                (   .075*Period      [l]+  .54);                -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender[21 -
    Q1 = .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender161 ) *
                (.   075*Period      [l]+  ,541;               -
            I1 =      Detrender      [3];

    I1 {Advance the phase
    of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
    jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[21 - .5769*11[4] -
    .0962*11[6]) * ( . 075*Period [l]+ .54);
    jQ = ( . 0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1 [2]- .5769*Q1[4] -
    3Q = .0962*Q1[6]* ) * ( .075*Period₋ [l]+ .54)(continued);
    (.075+Period 1 + .54);(continued)

                      Figure 17.1.     "A EasyLanguage code.
                      Figure 17.1.   MAMA EasyLanguage code.

     MAMA-The    Mother of AdaptiveMovingAverages    183
    MAMA—The Mother of Adaptive Moving Averages     183

    {Phasor addition for 3 bar averaging)}
    I2 = I1 - jQ;
    Q2 = Q1 + jI; for 3 bar averaging)}
     =       -
    {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
        the   discriminator}       before    applying
    I2 = .2*12 + .8*12 [l]
    ;
    Q2 = .2*Q2 + .8*Q2[1];
    =
    {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
    Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
    ;
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
    If Im< > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
    360/ArcTangent(Im/Re1 ;
    If Period > 1.5*Period [l] then Period=
    1.5*Period [l]
                       ;       ;
    If Period .67*Period[l] then Period = =
    .67*Period [l]
    ;
     If Period c  6 then Period=  6 ;        =
    If Period > 50 then Period= 50;
    Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
    SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
    If I1C > 0 then Phase= (ArcTangent (Q1/ 11)) ;
    Deltaphase = Phase[ll - Phase;
    If Deltaphase< 1 then Deltaphase= 1; I1));
    alpha = Speed / Deltaphase;
    If alphac SlowLimit then alpha= SlowLimit;
    MAMA = alpha*Price + (1 - alpha) *MAMA[l];
    FAMA = .5*alpha*MAMA + (1 - .5*alpha) *FAMA[l];
        =              +       -
    Plot1 (MAMA, "MAMA"); 1 - .S*alpha)*FAMA[1];
    Plot2 (FAMA,
    "FAMA'') ;
End;    (FAMA,  “FAMA");

End;
                  Figure 17.1.   (Continued).
              Figure 17.1.     (Continued).

    184    Rocket Science for Traders
    184    Rocket Science for Traders




      |    iN  Le
      NC
    YY

               PY



        EEE
        Figure 17.2. "A rapidly ratchets to follow price,
        Chart createdwith TradeStation2OOOi@by OmegaResearch, Inc.

     The unique character of MAMA is shown in Figure 17.2. The
  thicker MAMA line ratchets closely behind the price. The thin
  FAMA line steps in time sequence with " A , but the move-
  ment is not as dramatic because its alpha is at half value. From
  Figure 17.2 it is clear that thetwo adaptive moving averagelines
  only crossat major market reversals. Their action enables the cre-
  ation of a trading system that is virtually free of whipsaw trades.
ation of a trading system that is virtually free of whipsaw trades.
        Key Points to Remember

     Most adaptive moving averages use momentum as the basis
      of the nonlinearity of alpha in an Exponential Moving Aver-
      age (EMA).
      MesaAdaptiveMovingAverage ( M A M A ) uses the Hilbert
      Transform phase rate of change to produce a ratcheting
      action of the adaptive moving average.
      MAMA is ideal as the basis of a trading system to minimize
© whipsaws. as the basis of a trading system to minimize
   whipsaws.

        Chapter 18
        18

        EHLERS FILTERS

        To affinity-and beyond!
        "Buzz LIGHTYEAR
        (PARAPHRASED)
        —Buzz LIGHTYEAR (PARAPHRASED)

 The most common filters used bytraders are movingaverages-
 either Simple Moving Averages (SMA) or Exponential Moving
 Averages (EMA).These are linear filters. Linear filters are opti-
 mal for smoothing stationary, slowly varying signals that are
 corrupted with high-frequency noise. Unfortunately, price data
 are not stationary much of the time. A coin flip experiment is an
 example of a statistical stationary process. However,if weighted
  coins are introduced into the experiment randomly, the statis-
  tics of the experiment now depend on which coin is used, and
  therefore are nonstationary. The signals we dealwith can often
 be describedstatistically. For example, human speech has noise-
  like statistics. Theprocess is nonstationary because it changes
  from moment to moment. Although speech has noiselike char-
  acteristics, that is not to say that it does not carry information.
  Price data resembles speech in statistical characteristics. The
  data are both noiselike and nonstationary. One of the main prob-
  lems we encounter in trading when using technical analysis is
  that we must attempt to restore signals that are often nonsta-
  tionary and are also corrupted by noise. When dealing
        with non-
  stationary signals that have sharp transitions of their mean or
  when dealing with impulsive noise, linear filtering techniques
  give poor results. In this chapter, I describe how to make some
  amazing nonlinear filters that better handle these signals.
amazing nonlinear filters that better handle these signals.

        185
        185

     l86        Rocket Science for Traders
    186
     The filters I have invented are nonlinear FIR filters. It turns
     out that they provide both extraordinary smoothing in sideways
     markets and aggressively follow major price      movements with
     minimal lag. The development of my filters starts witha general
     class of FIR filters called OrderStatistic (OS)filters. These filters
     are well-known for speech and image processing,’     to sharpen
     edges, increase contrast, and forrobust estimation. In contrast to
     linear filters, where temporal ordering of the samples is pre-
     served, OS filters base their operation on the ranking of samples
     within the filter window. The data are ranked by their summary
     statistics, such as their mean or variance, rather than by their
     temporal position.
               Among OS filters, the Median filter is the best known. In a
     Median filter, the outputis the median value of all the data val-
     ues within the observation window. As opposed to an averaging
     filter, the Median filter simply discards all data except the
     median value. In this way, impulsive noise spikes and extreme
     price data are eliminated rather than included in the average.
     The median value can fallat the first sample in       thedata window,
     at the last sample, or anywhere in between. Thus, temporal

at characteristics are lost. The Median filter tends to smooth out
  short-term variations that lead to whipsaw trades with linear fil-
  ters. However, the lag of a Median filter in response to a sharp
  and sustained price movement is substantial-it necessarily is
  about half the filter window width. The response of a Median fil-
  ter that has a 10-bar windowwidth is shown in Figure 18.l. Note
   that the filter did not respond to small price movements in
   October/November or in January/February, which possibly
   couldhave eliminated several potential whipsawtrades that
   would have been produced
        by linear filters. Finding the median
   is a simple sorting problem,and,conveniently, Tradestation
is contains a median function. Therefore, I will not provide code
   for a Median filter.Median filters can be smoothed with an EMA
   to make them more presentable and easierto read. an EMA
to ’Pitas, Ioannis, and Anastasios N. Venetsanopoulos. “Order Statistics
   in Digital Image Processing,” Proceedings of the IEEE Sol12 (1992):
    in 1893-1921. Processing,” Proceedings of the IEEE 80/12 (1992):
    1893-1921.

    Ehlers Filters    187



              U Cl!
              J WT
    B  |   |I fh    I Il N90
    I i i




        Figure 18.1. Response of a 10-bar Medianfilter.
        Chart created with TradeStation2OOOi@by OmegaResearch, Inc.

     Like OS filters,Ehlers filters arerobust.Additionally, they
  exploit both the rank-order and temporal characteristics of the
  data. That is, the Ehlers filter maintains the temporal affinity
  between its coefficients and the statistic in use. The generalized
  Ehlers filter can be oriented
        to any statistic of your choice, making
  it extremely easyto calculate. The most obvious statistic touse is
  price momentum because these data enablethe nonlinear Ehlers
  filter to rapidly follow price changes
        (asthey enable the KAMA IIR
  filter to do the same).The range of statistic used is virtually limit-
  less. For example, the Elders filter could benonlinear with respect
  to acceleration (the rate change of momentum), Signal-to-Noise
  Ratio, volume, money
        flow (deltaprice times volume),and so on.
  Even other indicators, such as Stochastic or Relative Strength
  Indicators (RSIs) can be used as
        a statistic. This will become more
  apparent after we explain
        the calculating procedure.
     The Ehlers filter has a formulation similar to thatof the FIR
  filter. If y is thefilter output and xiis the ith
        input across a filter
  window width n, then theequation is ith input across a filter
window width n, then the equation is

188       Rocket
     y = ClXl+ c2x2 + c3x3 + c4x4 + . . .+ c,x,

       The c’s are the coefficients that contain the statistic in which
 you are interested. For example, if you are interested in     the5-bar
             momentum, each coefficient would be, in EasyLanguage nota-
 tion,   each coefficient would be, in        nota-
tion,     Price[count]- Price[count+ 51

      In this way, the coefficients are ordered according to their size
 within the window. For example, c3 couldpossiblyhave               the
              largest momentum and clcould bethe next largest momentum,
      and their temporal locations within the filter is retained. Unity
 gain of the filter must be retained. This naturally occurs by nor-
     malizing each of the filter coefficients by their sumso the signal
     output of the filter is expressed as an affine polynomial. So, the
 complete formal description of the Ehlers filter is     So, the
complete formal description of the Ehlers filter is

              n-1
                          > ox
                            y=

           The statistic used in the Ehlers filters should be detrended
         for maximum effectiveness. If we do not detrend the statistic,
        each of the coefficients will have a large common term relative
        to any differencesthere may bebetween them. If the coefficients
             have a large common term, the Ehlers filter behaves almost
 identical to an SMA.
     The EasyLanguage code for
                                   the Ehlers filter is given in Figure
 18.2 for the particular example of a 5-bar momentum.
          The example filter has 15 coefficients, although the array of
             coefficients is dimensioned to 25 to allow experimentation
 using a longer filter. (If a filter longer than 25 samples is desired,
          the dimension of the Array must be increased accordingly.) In
     the first calculation, we find each coefficientin thefilter as the
                5-bar momentum. The next computation sums the numerator
5-bar momentum. The next computation sums the numerator

                                 Ehlers Filters                 189

 Inputs:        Price( (H+L)/ 2 ) ,
           Length(15);
Inputs:
 Vars:     count( 0 1 ,     ;
          SumCoef ( 0 ) ,
vars:     Num(O),
          Filt ( 0 ) ;

 Array:     CoefL251 ( 0 ) ;

{Coefficients can be computed using any statistic of
  choice - - - - - - - - - a 5 bar momentum is used as an
       example}      can                           any
    --------- a 5 bar momentum is used as an
For count= 0 to Length- 1 begin
    Coef [count]= Absvalue (Price [count]-
For         Price       [Count+      51 ;
 end;                       =                              -
    Price [Count + 5]);
{Sum across the numerator and across all coefficients}
Nurn = 0;
  SumCoef = O ;       numerator         and across all     coefficients}
For count= 0 to Length-1 begin
    Num = Num + Coef [count] *Price [count];
Forend;    Sumcoef=   =₊    Sumcoef +    Coef     [count]; ;
Filt = Num / SumCoef; + Coef [count];

  Plot1     (Filt,           "Ehlers");

Plotl(Filt,
         Figure 18.2.       EasyLanguage code to compute Ehlers filters.

       Figure 18.2.         Easylanguage code to compute Ehlers filters.

as the product of each coefficient and the price at the corre-
sponding sample, and sums the coefficients alone. Finally, the
filter is completed by taking the ratio of the numerator to the
coefficient sum. Theperformance of this filter is shown in Fig-
ure 18.3.
                                        Figure18.3 illustrates how the momentum-derived Ehlers
filter clearly responds quickly to rapid price movements while
rejecting minor price movements to a greater degree. This kind
                                        rejecting minor price movements to a greater degree. This kind

    l90    Rocket Science for Traders
    190    Rocket Science for Traders


  15-Bar Ehlers Filter: yeI I | |
      EE IL 24 ig |e
       ih Meg fi5-Bar |

ANᴵ we
        -




   Figure 18.3. Performance of a 15-bar Ehlers filter using a5-bar momentum
   compared to the performance of a 15-bar SMA. a 5-bar momentum
   Chart m t e d with T r a d e t u t i m 2 0 ~ @by Omega Research,Inc.
 Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

  of filter can be usedto quickly respond to changes in trend direc-
of tion withoutproducing the whipsaws that are so prevalent when
  linear filters are employed. The Ehlers filter can be rendered very
  aggressive bysquaring each coefficient.
      The greater flexibility of Ehlers filters opens up whole
  new avenues of technical analysis research. For example, the
   statistic can be some tangible parameter of market activity
   such as money flow or volume. Also, more arcane parameters
   such as Signal-to-NoiseRatio can be used. In this case, the co-
   efficients where the Signal-to-NoiseRatio is the greatest would
   have the largest weight, discounting the price data values where
   the Signal-to-Noise Ratio is less. Also, Ehlers filters can be
   adaptive. For example, the length of the 5-bar momentum
   Ehlers filter in our example could be adaptive to the length of
   the measured cycle period. Such a filterwould be both adaptive
   and nonlinear. period. Such a filter would be both adaptive
and nonlinear.

    Ehlers Filters    191



        15 Bar Adaptive |I i in I lf
        Ehlers Filter ity i HA
        fh lh Lh PEN foes
i!. fiql| 15 Bar SMA . INIiji | pear




    Figure 18.4.  Performance of an adaptive 15-bar Ehlers filter compared to
    the performance of a 15-bar SMA.    filter compared to
   Chartcreatedwith Tradetution2OOOi@by Omega Research,Inc.
 Chart The flexibility and adaptability of the Ehlers filter is demon-
  strated in Figure 18.4, where the statistic used is the difference
  between the current price andthe previously calculated value of
  the filter.
     Since whipsaw signalstend to be suppressedwith Ehlers fil-
  ters, exciting new oscillators can be createdby taking the differ-
  ence of Ehlers filters that have different
        scales.
        Imagine
  indicators analogous to RSI or Stochastics without whipsaws!
  Oscillators could also be generated from
        the differences of Ehlers
  filters by using a different statistic in each filter.
     Regardless of the flexibility of the Ehlers filter, it is useful to
  step back and reflect on the motivation for deriving this filter
  type. By so doing, we may discoveran optimum solution for the
  calculation of the coefficients. We know market data are most
  often nonstationary. We also know that we want to follow the
  sharp and sustained movements of price as closely as possible.
  This led us to use the Median filter as an edge detector. But not
This led us to use the Median filter as an edge detector. But not

    192    Rocket Science for Traders










        Figure 18.5. Visualizing the sharpness of an edge.
        Figure 18.5. Visualizing the sharpness of an edge.
  all edges are the same. We can visualize the sharpness of edges
  in Figure 18.5 by imagining looking down on this figure as we
  would on a piece of paper, illuminated from aboveour left shoul-
  der, and hanging overthe edge of a desk. The edge at thetop of
  Figure 18.5 is very sharp, asif the paper were creased. Continu-
  ing downFigure 18.5, the light diffusion is more dispersed,
  giving the illusion that theedge becomesmore rounded. I
        nfact,
  the shading of Figure 18.5 was generatedby a Gaussian function
  whose standard deviation increased fromtop to bottom.
     If we consider the gray shading levels in Figure 18.5 as dis-
  tances, we have
        a way of computingfilter coefficients in terms of
  sharpness of the edge. White is the maximum distance in one
  direction from the median gray, and black is themaximum dis-
  tance in theother direction. In this sense, distance is a measure
  of departure from the edge, talung into account the edge sharp-
  ness. Transitioning to price charts, the difference in prices canbe
  imagined as a distance. Recalling the Pythagorean Theorem (in
imagined as a distance. Recalling the Pythagorean Theorem (in

        Ehlers Filters
  which the length of the hypotenuse of a triangle is equal to the
  sum of the squares of the lengths of the other two sides),we can
  apply it to our needs and say
        that a generalized length at any data
  sample is the square root of the sum of the squares of the price
  difference between that price and eachof the prices back forthe
  length of the filter window. The distances squared at each data
  point are the coefficients of the Ehlers filter. The calculation of
  the distancelike coefficients is perhaps best understood with ref-
  erence to the EasyLanguage code for the filter in Figure 18.6. If
erence to the EasyLanguage code for the filter in Figure 18.6. If
    Inputs: Price ( (H+L) ,/2)
        Length (15
        ;
  Inputs:
    Vars : count ( 0 , ;
        LookBack( 0 1 ,
  Vars: SumCoef ( 0 ) ,
        Num(O), ,
        Filt ( 0 ) ;
        (0),
    Array: Coef
        l251 ( 0 1 ,
        Distance2 [251
        ( 0 ) ;
  Array:
    For count= 0 to Length- 1 begin
        Distance2 [count]= 0;
    For     For      LookBack= 1 to    Length-  1 begin
        Distance2 [count]= Distance2 [count]+
         For            (price  [count]- Price  [count+  LookBackl 1 *
        (Price [count]- Price [count+ LookBackl 1 ;
            end;             -                  +
        Coef [count]= Distance2 [count]; + LookBack]);
     end;
    Num =   0;          =
     SumCoef = O ;
     For count= 0 to Length-1 begin
        Num = Num + Coef [count] *Price [count];
    For     Sumcoef =   Sumcoef + Coef   [count];
     end;     =        +
     If SumCoef <> 0 then Filt= Num / SumCoef;

     Plot1   (Filt,     'Ehlers")
                             ;     Num / SumCoef;

    Plotl(Filt,     “Ehlers”);
    Figure 18.6.      EasyLanguagecodeforthedistancecoefficientEhlersfilter.

  Figure 18.6.      EasyLanguage code for the distance coefficient Ehlers filter.

    194    Rocket Science for Traders
    194    Rocket Science for Traders



        [15-Bar Filter: I J il, I ll
        [Distance Coefficents, TTI T ME
JiiyZiI J J Ihr 15-Bar SMA .....I . ...: { ...! . . , ..:.|. .:.. ...p
        ~ .......,._.........,,.I.': ...... l l r n





       Figure 18.7 Performance of the distance coefficient Ehlers filter.
     Figure Chart created with TradeSttio&W@ b OmegaResearch, Inc.
        Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.
   the prices across the filter observation window are the same,
   then the coefficients of the filter are all the same, and we have
   the equivalent of an SMA. However, if the prices shift rapidly,
   the distances from the increasedprice points increase,and
   higher weights are given to these filter coefficients. The per-
   formance of the distance coefficient Ehlers filter is shown in
   Figure 18.7.
      The filter coefficients can be made to be even more nonlin-
   ear than calculated in Figure 18.6. For example, the distance can
   be cubed or raisedto the fourthpower (by squaring the squared
be distance). A reciprocal Gaussian response is an even more non-
   linear function of distance that we can use to calculate the filter
   coefficients. These more nonlinear responses followthe edges in
   price movement more aggressively. However, the very fact that
   they are so nonlinear removes much of the gray area in there-
   sponse. The mostnonlinear calculations produce results that are
   not discernable from median filters. The coefficients become
   black andwhite. The focus of our current research is to identify
black and white. The focus of our current research is to identify

        Bhlers Filters
        Ehlers Filters
  the onset of the price shift more accurately. The currently cal-
  culated distance functions are related to the change of price. In
  calculus terms, this is thefirst derivative. The shift of the rate
  change of price is the ideal identifier for the impending price
  move. In calculus terms, we can use the maximum of the sec-
  ond derivative to pinpoint the onset of the price change. The
  challenge is how to translate the second derivative into filter
  coefficients without introducing so much noise that the filter
  response is unusable.
     The opportunities to use Ehlers filters in technical analysis
  are limitless. I am sure whole books will be devoted to cata-
  loging the various statistics and applications where they work
  best. In the meantime, you will have the opportunity to exploit
  them for yourown fun and profit. the opportunity to exploit
them for your own fun and profit.
        Key Points to Remember

     Market data tend to be nonstationary much of the time.
     Therefore, adaptive technique or nonlinear data processing is
     required formaximum effectiveness.
      Ehlers filters are easy to compute. Compute the coefficient
      at each position in the filter for the chosen statistic. Com-
      pute the filter as the sumof the product of the prices times
      the coefficients dividedby the sumof coefficients.
      Ehlers filters aggressively follow sustained price shifts and
      revert to a FIR filter response when the prices arein a trading
      range.
      A host of indicators and trading systems can be derived from
      Ehlers filters. and trading systems can be derived from
    Ehlers filters.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

        Chapter 19

    MEASURING MARKET SPECTRA

        Science is the refusal to believe
        on the basisofhope.
        on the basis of "C.P. SNOW
        —C.P. SNow

  All major trading software platforms have the FastFourier
  Transform (FFT)
        tool available. Yet, using FFTs for market analy-
  sis is analogous to using a chainsaw at a wood-carving conven-
  tion. While chainsaws are certainly effective, they are not the
  correct tool for the job. Backin 1986,I wrote one of the first FFTs
  for traders using BASIC codefor an Apple II computer.'
  Although FFTs are powerful tools for many applications, there
  are better and more precise
        tools we can use for market analysis.
     A problem with FFTs is thatthey are subject to several con-
  straints. One constraint is that there canonlybe an integer
  number of cycles in thedata window. For example, if we have 64
  data samples in our measurement window (a 64-point FFT),the
  longest cyclelength we can measure is 64 bars.The next longest
  length has 2 cycles in thewindow, or 6f/z = 32-bar cycle.The next
  longest lengths are @A= 21.3 bars,% = 16 bars, andso on. There-
  fore, the integer constraint results in a lack of resolution. In
  other words, a large gap exists between the measuredcycle
  lengths that can be produced, in the length of cycle periods in
  which we wish to work. We cannot tell if the real cycle is 14 bars
which we wish to is 14
  'Kaufman, Perry J.llading Systems and Methods. 3rd ed. New York:
  John Wiley & Sons, 1998. and Methods. 3rd ed. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1998.

        197
        197

  198 Rocket Science for Traders

  or 19 barsin length. Therefore, the spectrum measurement nec-
  essarily has a low resolution.
     The only way to increase the FFT resolution is to increase
  the length of the data window. If we increase the data length to
  256 samples, we reach
        a 1-barresolution for cyclelengths in the
 vicinity of a 16-barcycle.However, obtaining this resolution
  highlights another constraint. The cycle measurement is valid
  only if the data are stationary over the entire data window. This
  means that a 16-bar cycle must have the same amplitude and
  phase over the total 16 full cycles. I
        n other words, using daily
  data, a 16-day cyclemust be consistently present for over a full
  year for the measurement to be valid. Can this happen? Idon’t
  think so! By the timea 16-bar cycleoccurs for more than several
  cycles, it will be observed by everytrader in theworld andthey
  will destroy that cycle by jumping all over it. Its potential long-
  term existence is the very cause of its demise! The only way to
  obtain a valid high-resolution cycle measurement is to select a
  technique for which only a short amount of data is required.
  MESA fills this requirement.
     Still not convinced? Let us demonstrate this point with
  some measurements. Figure 19.1shows how we have converted
  the amplitude of a conventional bell-shaped spectrum display
  into gray density according to the amplitude of the spectral
  components. Think of the gray shading ranging fromwhite hot
  to ice cold. Shading the amplitude enables us to plot the spec-
  trum contour below the price bars in time synchronization. A
  white line represents a sharp, well-defined cycle. A wide light
  gray splotch tells us that thetop of the bell-shaped curveis very
  broad andthat themeasurement has poor resolution. Figure 19.2
  is a 64-point FFT measurement of a theoretical 24-bar sine wave.
is Since this is a theoretical cycle with no noise, the measurement
  should be precise.But it is not! The spectral contour shows that
  the measurement has very poorresolution. The measured length
  could as easily be15 barsas 30 bars. Figure 19.3
        i s a 64-point FFT
  taken on real market data. Here, we can barely determine that
  the cycle is moving, but cannot definitively identify it. Revisit-
  ing these data later using the MESA measurement technique, we
  will see just how much more precise the MESA system is.
        we
will see just how much more precise the MESA system is.

Measuring Market Spectra    199
Measuring Market Spectra    199



RY             SR !  A    i
dBdB                      SE

-18            10   20    30    40 50
                   CYCLE PERIOD
    10             50
                  CYCLE   PERIOD
Figure 19.1.   Spectrumamplitude to shadingconversion.
Figure 19.1.   Spectrum amplitude to shading conversion.










               TE
iy






Figure 19.2.   A 64-point FFT of a theoretical 24-bar cycle,
Figure 19.2.   A G4-point FFT of a theoretical 24-bar cycle.

    200    Rocket Science for Traders
    200    Rocket Science for Traders









                               ;l;
             i        i
                               i l l !

    i  ;     ::       ;    i  9-11:

             a              40
                            30
                   -        20
                            10

        .Figure19.3. A 64-point FFT of March 1996 Treasury Bonds.
       Figure 19.3. A 64-point FFT of March 1996 Treasury Bonds.
      The notional schematic for the way MESA measures the
  spectrum is shown in Figure 19.4. The data sample is fed into
  one input of a comparator. This data sample can be any length-
  it can even be less than a single dominant cycle period. The
it other input into thecomparator comes fromthe outputof a dig-
  ital filter. The signal that is input into thedigital filter is white
  noise (containing all frequencies and amplitudes). This digital
  filter is tuned by the output of the comparator until the two
  inputs are as nearly alike as possible. In short, what we have
  done is pattern matching in the timedomain. We have removed
  the signal components with thefilter, leaving the residual with
  maximum entropy (maximum disarray).
      Once the filter has been set, we can do severalthings. First,
  we can connect a sweep generator to the filter input and sense
  the relative amplitude of the output as the frequency band is
  swept. This produces the bell-shaped spectral estimate similar
swept. This produces the bell-shaped spectral estimate similar

    Measuring Market Spectra    201
    Measuring Market Spectra    201
    I

     Feedback

     Feedback


    Noise Filter    Comparator
    Noise Filter    Waveform
        Waveform

    Figure 19.4.  How MESA measures the spectrum.
    Figure 19.4. How MESA measures the spectrum.








    a          oh
        \    | |










  Figure 19.5. MESA measurement of a theoretical 24-bar cycle.
Figure 19.5. MESA measurement of a theoretical 24-bar cycle.

    202                Rocket Science for Traders
    202                Rocket Science for Traders
   to the one shown in Figure 19.1. This spectral estimate is, in
to fact, the cycle content of the original data sample within the
   measurement capabilities of the digital filter. Second, because
   we have a digital filter on a clock, we can let the clock run into
   the futureand predictfutures prices onthe assumption that the
   measured cycleswill continue for a short time.
      The MESA spectrum measurement is notable in several
   respects.Most important, only a small amount of data is
   required to make a high-quality measurement. The MESA algo-
   rithm is, therefore, highly likely to be able to make a measure-
   ment using nearly stationary data, as the data need remain
   stationary for only a short while. As previously indicated, cycle
stationary for only a short while. As previously indicated, cycle

        J October  I   November I December   I l996  I     Februaw
                                                     !

        1:ⁱᴴA | ii:    iv/ⁱi i     |         I|     ||iii        |ⁱ   Le tt
                                                                      119




                                             Cycle

                                             ho

   Figure 19.6. MESA spectrum measurement of March 1996 Treasury
    Bonds. MESA        spectrum measurement  of March 1996 Treasury
    Bonds.

                  Measuring
                  Market      Spectra                  203
                      Market        203
  measurements are valid only if the data are stationary. Also,
  because the MESA algorithm requires only a short amount of
  data, we are able to exploit the short-term coherency of the
  market. This isentirely consistent with theTelegrapher’s Equa-
  tion solution to the Drunkard’s Walk problem.This means that
  when the market is in a Cycle Mode, the measured cycle has
  predictive capability. Additionally, the MESA approach makes
  high-resolution spectral estimates. The high-quality measure-
  d e n t of the theoretical 24-bar cycle is shown in Figure19.5,
  where only one cycle’s worth of data is used in the measure-
  ments. Here, the spectral contour is a single line, meaning that
  the bell-shaped curve is just a spike centered at the24-bar cycle
  period. Figure 19.6
       shows the ebb and flow
       of the measured cycle
  for the March 1996 Treasury Bonds. While clearly illustrated
  withthe MESA approach, this cycle characteristic wasonly
  inferred in theFFT measurement. characteristic was only
inferred in the FFT measurement.
       Key Points to Remember

  m The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is not the proper tool to
     analyze market data.
  m An FFT can measure only an integer number of cycles within
   *   its observation window.
  m An FFT requires a large amount of data to achieve high-
      resolution measurements. If we are looking at market data
      over a long time span, the FFT is useless because the data
      cannot fulfill the requirement to remain relatively station-
      ary in order to achieve a valid measurement.
 ! m MESA operates by pattern matching in the time domain.
      Data outside the short observation window are rejected.
  m There is typically onlyone dominant cycle in the market at
       a time.    only one dominant cycle in the market at
      atime.
  ,

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

             Chapter 20

    OPTIMUM PREDICTIVE FILTERS

The impossible is often the untried.
    The impossible is   "JIM GOODWIN
                        —Jmm GOODWIN

Technical analysis is necessarily reactive to the action of the
market. The indicators we develop are largely generatedto sense
the direction in which the price is expected to go. The predictive
nature of these indicators is based on correlation to past experi-
ence, so the expectation logic runs as follows: If something
happened before, it will very likely happen again. However, no
indicator is truly predictive in thescientific sense.
   In this chapter, I describe a predictive filter, explain how to
generate this filter, and (most important)define the conditions
under which the filter can be most effectively used. Like all
technical indicators, the Optimum Predictive filter cannot be
used universally. However, carefully observing
        those conditions
where it is appropriate canmake the Optimum Predictive filter
a valuable addition to your arsenal of technical analysis
weapons. I extrapolate from the concept of Optimum Predictive
filters and discuss another way to eliminate lag from moving
averages. discuss another way to eliminate lag from moving
averages.
        Optimum Predictive Filters
An Optimum Predictive filter is simply the difference between
the original function and its ExponentialMoving Average
the original function and its Exponential Moving Average

    205
                205

  206 Rocket Science for Traders
206
  (EMA).' That's it! It really is that simple! While the implemen-
  tation is rather uncomplicated, the derivation is considerably
  more complex. I
        ngeneral, the response of an optimumsystem is
  described bythe solution of the Wiener-Hopf equation, a discus-
  sion of which is well beyond the scope of this book.
     Havingdefined an Optimum Predictive filter, we must
  quickly specify the conditions that are required forthat filter to
  be valid. There are two such conditions. One condition is that
  the amplitude swings of the original function must be limited.
  The second condition is that theprobability of the function pas-
  sing through zero value must satisfy a Poisson probability distri-
  bution. It turns out that these
        conditions are easy to satisfy.
     Without getting into the math, a Poisson probability distri-
  bution tells us that thenumber of crossings we expect
        are not far
  removed from the average number of crossings. This is simply
  another way of saying that themarket mustbe in a Cycle Mode.
  An approximation to thePoisson probability distribution can be
  achieved using market data if the prices have been detrended.
        It
  is absolutely crucial that we detrend because buy/sell signals are
  obtained by the crossing of the signal and the predictive filter
  lines. If the price has not been properly detrended to meet the
  Poisson probabilityconstraint, the lines will not cross correctly.
     Since we desire a predictive filter, lag must be held to an
  absolute minimum. However, the price data must have at least
  some smoothing to separate the valid signals fromthe false. We
  use a 4-bar Weighted Moving Average (WMA) because it has a
  lag of only 1 bar. We detrend by taking the smoothed price less
  the smoothed price 2 bars ago. This particular momentum has
  the phase characteristics of a Hilbert Transformer and a lag of
  only 1 bar. As a practical matter, we need to smooth again after
  detrending to minimize the noise that was introduced by the
  detrending action. We therefore have 3 bars of lag just to obtain
  the proper detrended signal.This will cause some phase distor-
  tion of the output. The phase lag due to the 2-bar lag is 3*360/
tion of the output. The phase lag due to the 2-bar lag is 3*360/
  lLee,Y.W. Statistical Theory of Communication. New York: John
  Wiley 81 Sons, 1966. Theory of Communication. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1966.

        Optimum Predictive Filters 207
        Predictive Filters 207
 Period. However, the Hilbert Transformer provides a 90-degree
 phase lead. Therefore,if the data have a cycle period of 12 bars,
 the detrended price will be exactly in phase with the original
 price. The detrended price will lead in phase for longer cycle
 periods andwill lag in phase forshorter cycle periods. When
        the
 market is in a Trend Mode, the cycle periodstend to be longer.
 As a result, under Trend Mode conditions, signals that are too
  early will be produced. However, the Poisson probability crite-
  rion is not likely to be met under these conditions. In any event,
  the signals are invalid when the market is in a Trend Mode.
  These limitations mustbe accepted.
     The filtered output of the EMA should lag the detrended
  price by about 45 degrees in phase. When we see a 45-degree
  phase lag,we know thatthe dominant cycle component is
  approximately at the cutoff frequency of the EMA filter. The
  phasordiagram in Figure20.1 shows us why thisis so and
  demonstrates why the prediction works at all. The Detrender is
  a phasor at a reference angle of zero and rotates counterclock-
a wise. The DetrendEMA lagsthe Detrender by about 45 degrees.
wise. The DetrendEMA lags the Detrender by about 45 degrees.



    -DetrendEMA    Predict




    Detrender


    DetrendEMA


    l
     Figure 20.1. The predict Phasor Diagram.
     Figure 20.1. The predict Phasor Diagram.

  208 Rocket Science for Traders
208
  When we subtract the latter from the former in vector arith-
  metic, we reverse the direction of the DetrendEMA and then
  perform vector addition. When we do this, the Predict vector
  results.
     Since the DetrendEMA is at the cutofffrequency of the
  EMA, its amplitude is about 70 percent of the Detrender ampli-
  tude. At a 45-degree angle, the real and imaginary components
  are equal at a relative amplitude of 0.5 (0.7*Cos(45)).
        The vector
  subtraction in complex arithmetic is Predict = 1 - 0.5 + j0.5 = 0.5
  + j0.5. Since the two components of the Predict phasor areboth
  0.5, the absolute amplitude of the Predict phasoris 0.7 fromthe
  Pythagorean Theorem. Therefore, the Predict phasor must be
  multiplied by 1.4 to have the same normalized amplitude as the
  Detrender phasor.
     Frequency components within the EMA passband will not
  be attenuated as much as those components outside the pass-
  band. Additionally, the EMA passband’s frequency components
  will have less than 45 degrees of phase lag. If the phase lag is
  small, then thevector differencebetween the Detrender and the
  DetrendEMA will be a vector with a very small amplitude. The
  small-amplitude Predict vector contributes little as a predictor.
  However, if the DetrendEMA lagsthe Detrender by much more
  than 45 degrees, it falls outside the passband of the EMA filter,
  thus severely reducing its amplitude. In this case, the Predict
  vector will lead the Detrender by less than 45 degrees and will
  also have a very small amplitude. Therefore,having the fre-
  quency component outside the EMA passband also does not con-
  tribute to an effective predictor.
      A solution does exist to provide the proper phase relation-
  ship. First, we
        must compute the market cycle, using the Hilbert
  Transform. Then, we use the computed cycle periodto compute
  the desired alpha for the EMA. From Chapter 13, we remember
  that thecalculation is EMA. From Chapter 13, we remember
that the calculation is

      Figure 20.2 gives us the code to perform all the calculations
  for the Optimum Predictor. As we have seen before, the major-
for the Optimum Predictor. As we have seen before, the major-

     Inputs:                       Price( (H+L)/2);

     Vars :  Smooth ( 0 ) ,             ;
             Detrender ( 0 ) ,
  Vars:      I1 ( 0 1 ,
             Q1 ( 0 1 ,     (0),
             jI ( 0 1 ,
             jQ(O),
             I2( 0 1 ,
             Q2 ( 0 1 ,
             Re ( 0 1 ,
             Im(O),
             Period ( 0 ) ,
             SmoothPeriod( 0 ) ,
             Detrender2 ( 0 ) ,
             Smooth2( 0 ) ,        ,
             alpha ( 0 ) ,
             DetrendEMA ( 0        ,
             Predict ( 0 ) ;
                                  ,
     If  CurrentBarz            5  then      begin
If           Smooth =          (4*Price +              3*Price[l]  +  2*Price[2] +
    Price[3]) / 10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
    .5769*Smooth[41 - .0962*SmoothL61 ) * ( .075*
                  Period[l]        +  .55);             +                      -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = (.0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
    .5769*Detrender1 - .0962*Detrender [6l
                                                     41                        ) *
         Ql I1=   =     (     .075*Period         [l]+  .55);             (6])*⁻
                           Detrender[3] ;             -
    + .55);
   I1 {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
    jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[21 - .5769*11[4] -
    .0962*11[61)* ( .075*Period111 + .55);
    jQ = (.0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[4] -
         JQ    =        .0962*Q1[6]₊       ) * ( .075*Period₋        [l]+ .55);₋
              {Phasor                  addition  for
              I2 =   I1      -  jQ;               3 bar     averaging)}
                                             3      bar     averaging)
             Q2 =    Q1 +       jI;   for                          }
I              =        -                                              (continued)
         Q2    =        +    31;
                                                                       (continued)
         Figure 20.2.                      EasyLanguagecodefortheOptimumPredictor.
             Figure 20.2.                        code for the Optimum Predictor.

                                                    209
                                             209

 210                   Rocket Science for Traders
 210                 Rocket Science for Traders

     {Smooth theI and Q components before applying
     the discriminator}
          I2 =  .2*12 +    .8*12   [l];       before  applying
          Q2 =  .2*Q2 +    .8*Q2[l];
          =           +
     Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
     Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l]
     ;
     Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
     Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l];
     Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
     If Imc > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
     = 360/ArcTangent(Im/Re) ;
     If Period > 1.5*Period[l] then Period=
               1.5*Period   [l];         ;
     If Period c .67*Period[ll then Period=
     .67*Period [l]
     ;
          If     Periodc  6   then   Period=  6;     =
     If Period 50 then Period = 50;
     Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
     SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
                =                +
     {Optimum Predictor} +
     Detrender2 = .5*Smooth - .5*Smooth[2];
     Smooth2 = (4*Detrender2 + 3*Detrender2 [l]+
     2*Detrender2121 + Detrender2 L311 / 10;
          alpha =    1 -  ExpValue(-6.28/Period);      +
          DetrendEMA =     alpha*Smooth2 +           10;
     = (1 - alpha) *DetrendEMA[l];
     Predict = 1.4*(Smooth2 - DetrendEMA);

          Plot1 = (Smooth2,        "Signal");
          Plot2      (Predict,     "Predict")
                                          ;

     End;      (Predict,   “Predict”);

 End;
                        Figure 20.2.      (Continued).
 ity of the code involves the computation of the period using
 the Homodyne Discriminator algorithm. Once the period has
 been computed, the Optimum Predictor i s found in just a few
 lines of code. First,the minimum-length Hilbert Transformer is
 used to compute the Detrender2 value from the prices that have
used to compute the Detrender2 value from the prices that have

        Optimum Predictive Filters 211
        Predictive Filters 211
 been smoothed by the 4-bar Weighted Moving Average (WMA).
  Detrender2 is smoothed in the4-bar WMA to produce Smooth2.
  The alpha of the EMA is computed from the computed period,
  and the EMAof Smooth2 is taken using that alpha and is called
  the DetrendEMA. The difference between Smooth2 and the
  DetrendEMA is multiplied by 1.4 to produce the Predict phasor.
  Finally, the Smooth2 and Predict phasors are plotted as indi-
  cators.
     The OptimumPredictor is plotted in Figure 20.3 as the sub-
  graph belowthe price chart. Buy and sell signals occurwhen the
  Predict and Smooth2 lines cross. Most of these signals are in-
  deed prescient. The Optimum Predictor could probably work
  best in trading systems when used in conjunction with other
  rules to eliminate the false signals. Alternatively, the turning
  point of the LeadSine of the Sine waveIndicator could be used as
  a confirming signal. the Sine wave Indicator could be used as
a confirming signal.



        hpIl itᴶᴸFa th | FR
   ol po] ty| §ᴬᵘ pif il i| ff 1
  |

     A AAAS

  Figure 20.3. The Optimum Predictor accurately indicates many price turning
  points. many price turning
  Chartcreatedwith TradeSttion2OOOi@by OmegaReseurcb, Inc.
Chart created with TradeStation 2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.

        for Traders
  212 Rocket Science
212 Rocket Science for Traders
        Predictive Moving Averages

  The concept of taking a difference of lagging line from the origi-
  nal function to produce a leading function suggests extending
  the concept to moving averages. There is no direct theory for
  this, but it seems to work pretty well. If I take a 7-bar WMA of
  prices, that average lags the prices by 2 bars. If I take a 7-bar
  WMA of the first average, this second averageis delayed another
   2 bars. If I take the difference between the two averages and add
2 that difference tothe first average, the result should be a
   smoothed line of the original pricefunction with no lag. Sure,I
   could try to use more lag for the second moving average,which
   should produce a better predictive curve. However, remember
   the lesson of Chapter 3t An analysis curve cannot precede an
   event. You cannot predict an event before it occurs.
      If we then takea 4-bar WMA of the smoothed line to create
   a l-bar lag, this lagging line becomes a signal when the lines
a cross. This i s as close to an ideal indicator as we can get. There
cross. This is as close to an ideal indicator as we can get. There


    Inputs :          Price ( (H+L)/2) ;

    Vars: WMAl(0) ,      ((H+L) /2) ;
    Vars:   WMA2 ( 0 1 ,
            Predict ( 0 ,
            Trigger (0);

   WMAl = (7*Price + 6*Price [l] + 5*Price [2] + 4*Price[3]
        + 3*Price[4] + 2*Price [S] + Price [6]) / 28;
   WMA2 = (7*WMA1 + 6*WMA1 [l] + 5*WMA1[21 + 4*WMA1[3] +
        3*WMA1[41 + 2*WMA1[51 + WMA1[6]) / 28;
    Predict =   2*WMA1   -  WMA2;                         +
   Trigger = (4*Predict + 3*Predict [l] + 2*Predict[2] +
    Predict)  /   10;       + 3*Predict[1] + 2*Predict(2] +
    Plot1 (Trigger, "Trigger") ;
    Plot2 (Predict, "Predict") ;
    Plot2 (Predict,   “Predict”);            ~~
        Figure 20.4.    EasyLanguage code to compute predictive averages.
    Figure 20.4.      Easylanguage code to compute predictive averages.

    Optimum Predictive Filters    213



    BES    \  hy :


    ah    Trigger    1
    gi. \    -        \ C




        Figure 20.5. Predictive moving average and trigger signal.
        Chart created with TradeStation
        20OUi@by OmegaResearch, Inc.

  is no phase &stortion. The code to compute this indicator is

is given in Figure 20.4. The code couldhardly be simpler. A sample
  of the indicator is shown in Figure 20.5. be simpler. A sample
of the indicator is shown in Figure 20.5.
        Key Points to Remember

     A theoretically optimum predictor exists.

   A The Optimum Predictor is calculated as the difference be-
      tween a detrended signal and its Exponential MovingAver-
      age (EMA).
      The EMA constant of the Optimum Predictor is computed
      using the measured dominant cycle as the cutoff period of
      the filter.
      Moving average lagcan be eliminated by taking the moving
* average of the first movingaverage, taking the difference
      between them, and adding that difference backonto the first
      moving average. adding that difference back onto the first
    moving average.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

        Chapter 21

        WHAT YOU SEE
        IS WHAT YOU GET

        Success is a journey, not a destination.
        Success is a journey, not -BEN SWEETLAND
        —BEN SWEETLAND

 That famous half-glassof water-optimists see it as half-full and
 pessimists see it as half-empty.An engineer seesthe glass as hav-
 ing been designedwith too much capacity. That which we seeis
 really a matter of perception. Market technicians have designeda
 wide varietyof techniques to visualize what has happened in the
 past in order to infer what the future holds. Candlestick charts
  and Point and Figure charts are two examples of charting price
  data. Whenit comes to indicators, there is a plethora of wiggles,
  squiggles, zigzags, channels, andso on, that requires volumesto
  describe.
     I would nowlike toadd to thiscacophony of displays one so
  new and novel, one so sensitive, that it dramatically pinpoints
  variations and anomalies that cannot be removed with mathe-
  matical filters-at least within the lag constraints imposed by
  trading considerations. All we do is plot the Inphase and Quad-
  rature components of the Hilbert Transform. We can certainly
  plot these components in a subgraph below the price chart so
  they resemble an oscillator. However, if we were to plot these
  two components against eachother in an orthogonal set of coor-
  dinates (anx-yplot), we would be exactly tracing out the phasor
  diagram. Plotting the phasor is theobjective of this process.
diagram. Plotting the phasor is the objective of this process.

        215
        215

 2 16
216                       Rocket Science for Traders
        The first step in generating the phasor displayis to compute
 the Inphase and Quadrature components exactly the way we did
 in Chapter 7. The only difference is thatwe must plot the I1 and
 Q1 components in a subgraph. Additionally, wemust include a
 line of code to output theI1 and Q1 values into an ASCII file.
 Figure 21.1 leads youthrough this EasyLanguage code.                                          file.
Figure 21.1 leads you through this EasyLanguage code.

       Inputs:             Price  ( (H+L) /2);

       Vars:          Smooth(0),
              Detrender ( 0 ) ,
  vars:       I1 ( 0 )  ,
              Q1 ( 0 1 ,    (0),
              jI (01,
              jQ(O),
              I2( 0 ) ,
              Q2 ( 0 1 ,
              Re ( 0 1 ,
              Im(O),
              Period ( 0 ) ,
              SmoothPeriod( 0 ) ;

 If CurrentBar> 5 then begin
    Smooth = (4*Price + 3*Price[ll + 2*Price L21 +
  If             Price[3])         / 10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smootht21 -
    .5769*Smooth [4l- .0962*Smooth[61)* ( .075*
                 Period[ll         + ,541;                                                    -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
    Ql .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender[61) * ( .075*
                 Periodtl] +             .54);      .0962*Detrender                           -
              I1 =      Detrender          [3]
                                       ;

    {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
         {Advance            the  phase of      I1  and                           Ql  by 90   (continued)
                                                                                              (continued)
  Figure 21.1.                                      EasyLanguage code to create an ASCII file of Inphase and Quad-
  rature data.   EasyLanguage code to create an ASCII file of InPhase and Quad-
rature data.

                    What You See Is What You Get                        217

                   What You See Is What You Get                         217
    jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
    .0962*11[6]) * ( .075*Period[ll + .55) ;
    jQ = ( .0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[21 - .5769*Q1[41 -
    .0962*Q1[6]) * ( .075*Period[l] + .55);
JO    =                      +                      -           -
     {Phasor         addition           for
                                            3 bar        averaging)}
     I2 =    I1 -     jQ;
     Q2 = Q1 +        jI;        for  3    bar
      =            -
    {Smooth theI and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
     I2 =       .2*12 +      .8*12         [l];           before applying
                                      11
     Q2    =    .2*Q2 +      .8*Q21         ;
      =              +
    {Homodyne Discriminator}
    11
    Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 1 ;
    Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 1
    1
    1 ;
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
    ;
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l] ;
    If Imc > 0 and ReC S 0 then Period=
    360/ArcTangent (Im/Re);
    If Period> l.S*Period[l] then Period=
    1.5*Period [l]
                                  ;         ;
    If Period c .67*Period[ll then Period=
    .67*Period [l];
      If           Periodc  6 then      Period=          6;     =
    If PeriodS 50 then Period= 50;
    Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
    SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[ll;
              =                   +
      Plotl(I1, "I") ;                          +   .67*SmoothPeriod(1];
      Plot2        (Ql,
                      'Q")       ;

    If DateS Date [l] then Print (File ("c:\hilbert
    IQ.csv"), date, "," , 11, ",", Q11 ;
If                 >
End;  IQ.csv”),       date,       “,”   ,    I1,

End;
                             Figure 21.1.       (Continued).
                    Figure 21.1.                (Continued).

  218
218
     The final line of code creates a file in theHILBERT directory
  on your C: drive. You should have created this directory using
  WindowsExplorerbeforeyou runthe program. The file is
  IQ.CSV, a comma-delimited ASCII file. You will import this file
  into Excel to generate the phasor display. Reading the file into
  Excel is straightforward. Just click FILE . . . OPEN and position
  C:\HILBERT in theLook In dialog box. Change
        the Files of Type
  dialog box to Text Files. The file IQ should then appear in the
  main dialog box. Highlight this file and click OPEN, and the
  three columns of the file will be displayed.
     The phasor is created by highlighting roughly 30 rowsof the
  two right-hand columns and clicking on the Chart Wizard in the
  Excel toolbar. Inthe first step of the Wizard, select the XY(Scat-
  ter)Plot andthen choose the option to show the data points con-
  nected by smooth lines. Then click NEXT. Accept the defaults
  of the Wizard step 2 by clicking NEXT. In the Wizard step 3,
  select the Gridlines tab and then unselect the option to show
  majorgridlines.Skip the Wizard step 4 by clicking FINISH.
  Click on the Series 1legend and press the delete key to remove
  it. Finally, click on the chart and drag it so the gray graphical
  area is approximately square.
     When youfinish these operations,you will see a display sim-
  ilar to that shown in Figure 21.2, which depicts 29 points of a
  theoretical 30-barsine wave. Due to the sign convention of com-
  puting the Quadrature component, the phasor track rotates
  clockwise. The cycle period can be estimated by counting the
  points in any quadrant and multiplying by 4. A perfect cyclewill
  plot out as a circle in thiskind of display.
      We will now followthe phasor display over 120
        trading days
  of the June 1996 TreasuryBonds contract. I like to use this old
  data set because it transitions from a Trend Mode to a Cycle
  Mode, and backto a Trend Mode. Sincethere are no intermedi-
  ate modes, this data set facilitates explanation.
      Figure 21.4 is a phasor plot for the data in theshaded boxof
  Figure 21.3. Pricesstart ina Trend Modeat the left edge of the
  box. The startingpoint is located in the first quadrant of Figure
  21.4. Since the market is in a TrendMode, the phase hardly
  advances for about the first 17 bars. Then, due to the price dip
advances for about the first 17 bars. Then, due to the price dip

    What You See Is What You Get    2 1 9
    What You See Is What You Get    219










    2


        4

        C

       Figure 21.2 Rventy-nine points of a 30-bar sine wave. A perfect
       cycle plots as a circlein the phasor display. sine wave. A perfect
     cycle plots as a circle in the phasor display.

  and recovery, an apparent 12-bar cycle started. I arrived at this
  cycle period by counting the points in the left-half plane and
  doubling them. After another few points, this cycle fails and the
  Trend Mode is reestablished for data to the end of the shaded
  box. The data set ends in theTrend Modein thefourth quadrant
  of the phasor plot.
     The Trend Mode continues as depicted in theshaded box in
  Figure 21.5 andas a phasor in Figure 21.6, starting in thefourth
  quadrant. There is no definitive cycle movement in thefirst 22
  bars except for about a half cycle of a 14-bar cycle.I estimated
  the period of this half cycle bycounting the number of points in
  the right half of the plot for this point in time. After this brief
  cyclic burst, the phasor wandersalmost aimlessly for another 15
cyclic burst, the phasor wanders almost aimlessly for another 15

 RY RO
        I! bl Hi iid i
        IEEE Mh Ll
        TL
        il If i i il | fe
|
      rr A OR.
coh |
        | i !

  Figure 21.3. First 40-bar analysis section of Treasury Bonds. Theshaded win-
  dow is plotted as a phasor in Figure 21.4. Bonds. The shaded win-
  Chart created with TradeStatiota2OOOi@by Omega Reseamh,Inc.

Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.










 8ES







    Figure 21.4. Phasor diagram for Figure 21.3 data.
    Figure 21.4. Phasor diagram for Figure 21.3 data.
        220
        220

    Hoyil
    [AN


        ili
   A TT iMADE EE
   i.    EEE                                               TT  -
    Th NEN     =
  ft
L
  Figure 21.5. Second 40-bar analysis section of TreasuryBonds.The shaded
    window is plotted as a phasor in Figure 21.6.      Bonds.  The shaded
    Chart created with Tradesttion2OOOPby Omega Research,Inc.

    Chart created with    by Omega Research, Inc.




    15{


    N








    Figure 21.6. Phasor diagram for Figure 21.5 data.
    Figure 21.6. Phasor    for Figure 21.5 data.
        221
        221

 222 Rocket Science for Traders
222 Rocket Science for Traders
bars. The path of the phasor even turns counterclockwise dur-
 ing this period. A counterclockwise rotation theoretically
 means thattimeis running backwards. Thisis impossible.
 Therefore, the only rational explanation for the path of the pha-
 sor is that themarket is in a Trend Mode, where the advancing
 of phase has no meaning.
    A new cycleis established at thetop of Figure 21.6, and con-
 tinues for 14 barsto theend of the data set. The cycle period is
 about 20 bars,estimated by counting the points in theright half
 of the plane during this point in time. The cycle shape is cer-
 tainly distorted due to large amplitude fluctuations, but it is
 rotating about the origin at a relatively constant rate.
    Near textbook cycles continue in Figure 21.8 for about 1.5
 cycles from the beginning of the data period shown in Figure
 21.7. Just by counting the points over one full rotation, we can
 estimate the cycle periodto be about 16 bars. However,
        about 21
 barsfrom the beginning of the data set, another anomaly
 appears. Two very fast whiffles, or curlycues, appearin thedata.
 The shorter of these appears to be about a 5-bar cyclesuperim-
 posed on a 12-bar cycle;both of these appear to be superimposed
 on the preexisting 16-bar cycle.
    Returning to thephasor diagramschematic, this timein Fig-
 ure 21.9, we cansee an explanation for these whiffles.
    A shorter subordinate cycle can be viewedas a phasor that
 rotates at the tip of the Dominant Cycle phasor, rotating at a
 rate faster than that of the Dominant Cycle. The Dominant
 Cycle phasor is rotating at its own rate. Thus, an evanescent
 five-day cycle produces a signature like the smaller whiffle in
 Figure 21.8. I
        n fact, the shorter whiffle is superimposed on the
 longer 12-bar whiffle. The really interesting point is that the
 two whiffles indicate that the phase of the dominant cycle
 has stoppedadvancing,signaling the beginning of a Trend
 Mode.With this identification, we see that the TrendMode
 started about 17 bars before the end of the data. Having iden-
 tified the Trend onset well before the major price movement,
 we are well-equipped to maximize the profit of the Trend
 movement.
    A subordinate cycle does not necessarily have to be a com-
 plete cycle. Fractionalsubordinate cycles can account for erratic
plete cycle. Fractional subordinate cycles can account for erratic

TTT J
             OL        (|
TTT!   |                                  TTT |
             LL Hi ;  |                      iH
             I el ii!      4
T= Po  pe    i  I                          mmm|        Ee
                 =
 i hl            B44
Hm

 Figure 21.7 Third 40-bar analysis section of Treasury Bonds. Theshaded win-
 dow is plotted as a phasor in Figure 21.8.        Bonds. The shaded
 Chartmated with TraakStatkm2OOOi
                 @ by OmegaResearch, Inc.        win-

Chart created with TradeStation2000i® by Omega Research, Inc.










            I: |
             4


             Figure 2 1.S. Phasor diagram for Figure 2 1.7 data.
 Figure 21.8.     Phasor diagram for Figure 21.7 data.
                 223
                 223

    224    Rocket Science for Traders
    224    - Rocket Science for Traders


    Subordinate Cycle
    Subordinate Cycle


    Dominant Cycle
    Dominant Cycle


        Figure 21.9. A subordinate cycle phasor rotates
        at the arrowhead of the dominantcycle phasor.
        at the arrowhead of the dominant cycle phasor.

  paths in thephasor plot,such as the one that exists near the ori-
  gin of Figure 21.6.
     Subordinate cycles whose periods are longerthan theperiod
  of the dominant cycle are more difficult to visualize. They
  throw the trajectory of the dominant cycle off center. Whether
  the subordinate cycle is shorter or longer than the Dominant
  Cycle, the phasor plot immediately identifies the impact of sub-
  ordinate cycles without performing any additional filtering.
  Additional filtering would certainly introduce lag that would
  make further analysis even more difficult.
     The key advantageof being acquainted with thephasor plot
  is thatyou nowhave a tool to precisely estimate the cyclic turn-
  ing points. You want to sell when the Inphase component is at
  its maximum and buy when the Inphase component is at its
  minimum. These buy and sell rules are subject, however, to the
  lag of the computation of the Inphase component. Reviewing
  the EasyLanguage code,we see that there i s a l-bar lag due to the
  4-bar WMA, a 3-bar lag due to thedetrending (the center of the
  filter),and a 3-bar lag for
        the final computation of 11. The buying
  and selling opportunity must account for this 7-bar lag in the
  computation of the Inphase component. If you have a 14-bar
computation of the InPhase component. If you have a 14-bar

        What You See Is What You Get 225

  dominant cycle, the 7-bar lag constitutes a 180-degree shift of
  the phasor location (i.e., a half cycle). Keep in mind that the
  detrending operation in thecomputation introduced a 90-degree
  phase lead.Thus, you needcompensate only for a net 90-degree
  lag (a quarter cycle)for this 14-bar cycle. Saidanother way, you
  must anticipate the maximum Inphase component by 3.5 bars
  (l% bars) for a selling opportunity and anticipate the minimum
  Inphase component by 3.5 bars for a buying opportunity. This
  precision technique is vastly superior to the half-cycle offsets
  you may haveseen described in most trading literature.
     Since the compensation calculation is so important, we will
  try to clarlfy by using another example. Supposethe dominant
  cycle is 21 days. The 7-bar lag wouldbe one-third of a cycle, or
  120 degrees. Removing the 90-degree lead that occurred due to
  detrending, the resultant lag of the Inphase component is only
  120- 90 = 30 degrees. Thirty degrees is one-twelfth of a cycle, or
  1.75 daysin this example of a 21-bar cycle.So, in this case, you
  would have to anticipate the Inphase maxima and minima by
  only about two days. the InPhase maxima and minima by
only about two days.
        Key Points to Remember

     A phasor diagram can be displayed by plotting the Inphase
     and Quadrature components of the Hilbert Transform in an
     Excel x-y scatter plot.
     The existence of more than one cycle can be identified by
e whiffles in thephasor diagram.
     The phasordiagram can help you anticipate the precise
e cyclic turning points in themarket. the precise
    cyclic turning points in the market.

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

    na en you’ve ~ i n i s ~ e ~
    c ~ ~ n ~ i n ~ ,
        you’re ~ i n i s ~ e ~ .
        -BENTAMINFRANKLIN


It is not an uncommon occurrence that when I reach the end of
a seminar, breathless and e ~ a u s t e d ,
        I get a question like ‘‘Can I
use the cycle to optimize an RSI?” My immediate unspo~en
reaction is ‘(Whywould someone want to do that?” I had just
shown the audience the derivation of a theoretically optimum
predictor, described the Sinewave Indicator that has few false
whipsaw signals in the Trend Mode, and introduced an Instanta-
neous Trendline as a Trend Mode trading tool. After all, how can
anything be better than theoretically optimum? Is there really a
need for optimized conventional indicators? Then upon further
reflection, I finally realized that this was exactly the question
that intrigued me about technical analysis. I was unwillin
use a 14-dayperiod in the RSI just because Welles Wilder said so.
My quest for the best way to adapt to market conditions has led
to all the research I have done, the results of which are chroni-
cled in this book.
    So, what is the best indica~or?There is no single correct
answer to that question. Everything is relative. Some indi~ators
work better in one market than another. It may also depend on
the preference of the trader. Using several indicators together
may uncover a synergism unavailable to one indicator alone.


    227

  228 Rocket Science for Traders
228 Rocket Science for Traders
     Many serviceable indicators exist. Improving them by mak-
  ing them adaptive tocurrentmarket conditions should be
  the objective of every trader and is the object of this book. In
  this final chapter, I review three standard indicators: Relative
  Strength Indicator (RSI),Stochastic, and the Commodity Chan-
  nel Indicator (CCI).This review includes a discussion of making
  these indicators adaptive to themeasured cycle period
        using the
  Homodyne Discriminator. measured cycle period using the
Homodyne Discriminator.


     Welles Wilder definedthe RSI as1
    Welles Wilder defined RSI = 100 (loo/(1+ RS))
     where RS = (ClosesUp)/(ClosesDown)
    where  RS = = CU/CD              Down)
     RS is shorthand for Relative Strength. That is, CU is the sumof
     the difference in closingpricesover      the observation period
     where that difference is positive. Similarly, CD
                                                    is the sumof the
     difference in closing prices over the observation period where
     that difference is negative, but the sum
                                           is expressed asa positive
     number. When we substitute CU/CD for RS and simpllfy the
     RSI equation, we get                for RS and simplify the
    RSI equation, we RSI = 100 -     100
                                  1 + CU/CD
           = 100 -                  1OOCD
                                  CU + CD
           -
           - lOOCU + 1OOCD- lOOCD
           100CU +                  CU + CD

        RSI = 1oocu + CD
        CU + CD
        RSI= CU+CD
  'Wilder, J.Welles, Jr. New Concepts in Technical nuding Systems.
  Winston-Salem, NC:Hunter Publishing, 1978. Trading Systems.
Winston-Salem, NC: Hunter Publishing, 1978.

        Making
        Standard Indicators Adaptive                            229
        Standard Indicators        229
    I
         n other words, the RSI is the percentage of the sum of the
   delta closes up to the sumof all the delta closes overthe obser-
   vation period. The only variable here is the observation period.
   For maximum effectiveness, the observation period should be
   half the measured dominant cycleperiod.       If the observation
   period is half the dominant cycle fora pure sine wave, the closes
   up is exactly equal to the total closes during part of the cycle
   from thevalley to the peak. In this case, the RSI would have a
   value of 100. During another part of the cycle-the     next half
   cycle-there   would be no closes up. During this half cycle, the
   RSI would have a value of zero. So, in principle, half the meas-
   ured cycle is the correct choice forthe RSI observationperiod. In
   Figure 22.1, the EasyLanguage code measures the cycle period
   using the Homodyne Discriminator algorithm. It thenuses that
   period as the basis for finding CU and CD, and computing the
   RSI. Since half the cycle period may
                                        not be the universal answer,
   we include a CycPart input as a modifier. This inputallows you
   to optimize the observation period for eachparticular situation.
to          The optimized RSI tends to be in phase with the original
   price data. This suggests a way to turn a good indicator into a
   great indicator. If we subtract 50 from the optimized RSI, we
   would get a zero mean and thus tend to have Poisson-likestatis-
   tics on the RSI’s zero crossings. If that were the case, we could
    smooth the optimized RSI and make an OptimumPredictive fil-
    ter from it. That way we could anticipate signals rather than
    wait for signals to cross the 30 percent and 70 percent marks
    for confirmation as is done with the standard indicator. I will
    leave it to you to decide which method best suits your needs and
    purposes.   to decide which method best suits your needs and
purposes.

        Stochastic

    The name of this indicator is rather amusing because the in-
    dicator has absolutely nothing    to do with a statistical sto-
    chastic process. A stochastic process is defined as a randomly
    determined sequence of operations. When the indicator was
    forwarded by Rick Redmont to Tim Slater, then president of
forwarded by Rick Redmont to Tim Slater,   then president of

                              for         Traders
230                  Rocket Science
230               Rocket Science for Traders

    Inputs:       Price( (H+L)/2   1 ,
                  CycPart ( .S1 ;
Inputs:               ((H+L)/2),
               CycPart .5;

Vars:

        11(0),
        Q1(0),
        jr),
        joo),
        12(0),
        Q2(0),

        Im(0),
        Period (0),
        SmoothPeriod (0),
        count (0),
        cu(o0),

    If  CurrentBar> 5 then     begin
If         Smooth =  (4*Price +    3*Price  [l]+ 2*Price[2] +
    Price [3]
    ) / 10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
    * ( .075*
    .5769*Smooth [41- .0962*Smooth [61)
           Period[l]  + .54);         +                   -
    - .0962*Smooth(6])*(.075%
    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = (.0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
    .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender [6]
        Ql  = ( .075*Period   [l]+ .54);               -) *
           I1 = Detrender     [3];

    I1 {Advance the phase
    of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
    jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[21 - .5769*11[41 -
    .0962*11[6]) * ( .075*Period[ll + .54);
    jQ = ( .0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[4] -
    jQ = .0962*Q1[6]* ) * ( .075*Period- +[l]+ .54)(continued);
    .54);
    (continued)
    Figure 22.1. EasyLanguage code to compute the adaptive RSI.
   Figure 22.1. Easylanguage code to compute the adaptive RSL.

               Making
                   Standard                          Indicators Adaptive                  231
                                      Making Standard Indicators Adaptive             231

        {Phasor     addition                   for
                                                     3 bar          averaging)}
        I2 =   I1 -                 jQ;       3      bar      averaging)}
        Q2  =  Q1 +                 jI;       for
         =        -
 Q2 {Smooth theI and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
        I2 =   .2*12 +                       .8*12   [l]   before         applying
    ;
   Q2 = .2*Q2 + .8*Q2 [l];
 Q2 {Homodyne Discriminator}
   Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l]
    ;
    Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l]
    ;
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
    ;
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l] ;
    If Imc > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
    360/ArcTangent (Im/Re)
    ;
    If Period> 1.5*Period[l] then Period=
    1.5*Period [l]
    ;
    If Periodc .67*Period[l] then Period=
    .67*Period ;
    [l]
        If   Periodc   6                 then            Period= 6;       =
    If Period 50 then Period = 50;
    Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
    SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[l];
    =
    cu = 0; = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod(1];
    CD = 0;
    For count= 0 to Int(CycPart*SmoothPeriod) -
  For 1 begin
         1        IfCUClose[countl=                   -   Close[count +        13  >  0 then
              If   CloseCU +                  (Close[countl        -
                                          [count+         l]) ;       +      1   > 0  then
    If Close[countl - Close[count + l] < 0 then
    If CD = CD + (Close [count+ 13 -
        End ;                     Close   [count];         +       1  -          < 0  then
    If CU + CD c > 0 then RSI= 1 O O * C U / (W + CD);

        Plot1                     (RSI,
                     "RSI')                  ; RSI       = 100*CU  /     (CU  +    CD);
End;                “RSI”);

End;
                                          Figure 22.1.   (Continued).
                    Figure 22.1.                     (Continued).

     232        Rocket Science for Traders
            Rocket Science for Traders
     Compu-Trac, the word stochastic was scribbled in the margin.
     Tim thought that was a good name, and it stuck. Theindicator
     has since been popularizedby Dr. George Lane.
      The Stochastic measures the current closing pricerelative to
     the lowest low over the observation period. It then normalizes
     this to the range between the highest high and the lowest low
     over the observation period. In equation form this is low
    over the observation  In Close LL     is
                Stochastic =     -
        m - L L
        Stochastic =
  If the current closing priceis equal to the highest high over the
If observation period, then the Stochastic has a value of 1. If the
  current closing price is equal to the lowest low over the obser-
  vation period, then theStochastic has a value of zero. These are
  the limits over which the Stochastic can range.
      To optimize the Stochastic for the measured cycle, the cor-
  rect fraction of the cycle to use is one-half, as the Stochastic can
  range from its minimum to itsmaximum on each half cycle of
  the period. As before, the codefor the optimized Stochastic
  (givenin Figure 22.2)measures the cycle periodusing the Homo-
  dyne Discriminator algorithm and then uses that period as the
  basis for finding
        HH and LL and computing the Stochastic. Since
  half the cycle period may not be the universal answer, we in-
  clude a CycPart input as a modifier. This input allows you to
  optimize the observation period for eachparticular situation.
      The optimized Stochastic tends to be in phase with theorig-
  inal price data. This suggests a way to turn a good indicator into
   a great one.If we subtract 50 from the optimized Stochastic, we
a would geta zero mean and thus tend to have Poisson-likestatis-
   tics on the Stochastic’s zero crossings.If that were the case, we
   could smooth the optimized Stochastic and make an Optimum
   Predictive filter from it. That way we could anticipate signals
   rather than wait for signals to cross the 20 percent and 80 per-
   cent marks for confirmation as is done with thestandard indica-
   tor. I will leave it to you to decide which method best suits your
   needs and purposes. to decide which method best suits your
needs and purposes.

                      Making
                         Standard        Indicators Adaptive    233
                   Making Standard Indicators Adaptive        233
  I
   Inputs:             Price( (H+L)/2),
                       CycPart ( . 5);
  Inputs:
   Vars :   Smooth ( 01 ,     .5 ;
            Detrender( 0 ) ,
  Vars:     I1(01,
            Q1 ( 0 )  ,   (0),
            jI(01,
            jQ(O),
            I2( 0 1 ,
            Q2 ( 0 1 ,
            Re ( 0 1 ,
            Im(O),
            Period ( 0   ,
            SmoothPeriod(O),
            count( 0 ) ,
            HH(O),            (0),
            LL(O),
            Stochastic( 0 ) ;

       If  CurrentBar>    5    then   begin
   If       Smooth =        (4*Price +   3*Price[l] +  2*Price[2] +
      Price[3]) / 10;
      Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
      .5769*Smooth[4] - .0962*Smooth [6]
      ) *
               (   .075*Period    [l]+   .54);                   -

      {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
      Q1 = ( .0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender [2]-
      .5769*Detrender [4]- .0962*Detrender [6]
           Q1   (  .075*Period    [l]+   .54);                 ) *
            I1 = Detrender[3] ;         -

      {Advance the phase
      of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
      jI = ( .0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
      .0962*11[6] ) * ( .075*Period [l]+ .54);
      jQ = ( .0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[4] -
     3Q .0962*Q1[61)* * ( .075*Period[l] + -54);
      (.075*Period 1 + .54); (continued)
      (continued)
  Figure 22.2. EasyLanguage code to compute the adaptive Stochastic.
Figure 22.2. Easylanguage code to compute the adaptive Stochastic.

2 34                                          Rocket Science for Traders
234                       Rocket Science for Traders

    {Phasor addition for
    3 bar averaging)}
    I2 = I1 - j Q ;
    Q2 = Q1+ jI; for 3 bar averaging)}
            =            -
    {Smooth theI and Q components before applying
    the discriminator}
         I 2     =  .2*12   +  .8*12 [l];            before    applying
         Q2      =  .2*Q2   +  .8*Q2 [l];
            =              +
    {Homodyne Discriminator}
    Re = I2*12[l] + Q2*Q2 [l];
    Im = I2*Q2 [l] - Q2*12 [l];
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l]
    ;
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l] ;
    If Im < > 0 and Re<> 0 then Period=
    360/ArcTangent (Im/Re)
    ;
    If Period₅ 1.5*Period[ll then Period=
             1.5*Period        [l];           ;
    If Period < .67*Period[ll then Period=
    .67*Period[l];
         If Period <          6 then         Period= 6;        =
    If Period> 50 then Period= 50;
    Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[l];
    Smoothperiod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[l];
                    =              +
    HH = High; = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod(1];
    LL = Low;
    For count= 0 to Int(CycPart*SmoothPeriod) -
    1 begin
        For              If High[count]          HH then HH =  High[count] ;
         1               If Low[countl          LL  then  =LLLow [count];
         End;                            >               =
    If HH-- LL <> 0 then Stochastic= (Close - LL) /
    If ( H H₋ LL);
    <> then Stochastic = (Close - LL) /
    Plot1 (Stochastic, "Stoc");
    End;           (Stochastic,     “Stoc”);
End;
                                  Figure 22.2.   (Continued).
                           Figure 22.2.       (Continued).

        235
        Commodity Channel Index 235

     Refer to Figure 22.3 through discussion forEasyLanguage
  coding. The Commodity Channel Index (CCI) computes the
  average of the median price of each bar over the observation
  period.2It also computes the Mean Deviation ( M D ) from this
  average. The CC1 is formed as the current deviation from the
  average pricenormalized to theMD. With a Gaussian probabil-
  ity distribution, 68 percent of all possible outcomes are con-
  tained within the first standard deviation from the mean. The
  CC1is scaled so that values above+l00 are above the upper first
  standard deviation from the mean and values below -100 are
  below the lower first standard deviation from the mean. Multi-
  plying the MD in thecode by0.015 implements this normaliza-
  tion. Many traders use this indicator as an overbought/oversold
  indicator with 100 or greaterindicating that themarket isover-
  bought, and -100 or less that the market is oversold. Since the
  trading channel is being formed by the indicator, the obvious
  observation period is the same as the cycle length. Since the
  complete cycleperiodmay not be the universal answer, we
  include a CycPart input as a modifier. This input allows youto
  optimize the observation period for eachparticular situation.
optimize the observation period for each particular situation.










  ‘Lambert, Donald R. “CommodityChannel Index.” Commodities
  Magazine (October 1980):40-41. Channel Index.” Commodities
Magazine (October 1980): 40-41.

236                                      Rocket Science for Traders

       Inputs : Price ( (H+L)/2) ,
                                 CycPart (1);
Inputs:
       Vars : Smooth ( 0 ) ,
           Detrender ( 0 ) ,
Vars:      11 ( 0 )                   I
           Q1 ( 0 )                   ,  (0),
           jI ( 0 )                   I
           jQ(O),
           I2 ( 0 1 ,
           Q2 ( 0 ) I
           Re ( 0 )                   ,
           Im(O),
                            Re Period ( 0 ) ,
           Smoothperiod ( 0 ) I
           Length ( 0 ) ,
           count ( 0 ) ,                  (0),
           MedianPrice ( 0 ) l
           Avg(O),                       (0),
           cc1 ( 0 )                     ;
             (0),
       If CurrentBar                      >  5 then begin
If         Smooth =                    (4*Price +     3*Price[l] +     2*Price [2] +
    Price [3]) / 10;
    Detrender = (.0962*Smooth + .5769*Smooth[2] -
    .5769*Smooth[4] - .0962*Smooth[6]) *
                              ( .075*Period [l] +     .54);            -

    {Compute Inphase and Quadrature components}
    Q1 = (.0962*Detrender + .5769*Detrender[2] -
          Ql    = .5769*Detrender(               [4] - .0962*Detrender[6]) *
                                .075*Period [l] +     .54);            -
           I1 =                       DetrenderL31 ; -

    I1 {Advance the phase of I1 and Q1 by 90 degrees}
    jI = (.0962*11 + .5769*11[2] - .5769*11[4] -
          JT jQ .0962*11[61)=             * ( .075*Period[l] +     .54);           -
    (.0962*Q1 + .5769*Q1[2] - .5769*Q1[4]
    JQ = .0962*Q1[61)* ( .075*Period[l]₋ + .54);
                                .0962*Q1[6])*             +    .54); (continued)
                                                                   (continued)
          Figure 22.3.                    EasyLanguage code to compute the adaptive CCI.
       Figure 22.3.                   EasyLanguage code to compute the adaptive CCI.

                Making Standard Indicators Adaptive                  237

        {Phasor             addition       for
                                               3 bar   averaging)}
        I2 =      I1 -       jQ;
        Q2 = Q1 +            jI;    for    3  bar
         =         -
    {Smooth the I and Q components before applying
             the    discriminator}                     before    applying
        I2 =       .2*I2 +        .8*12       [l]
                                               ;
        Q2 =       .2*Q2 +        .8*Q2       [l];
         =                  +
    {Homodyne Discriminator}
   Re = I2*12 [l]+ Q2*Q2 [l];
    Im = I2*Q2 [l]- Q2*12 [l];
    Re = .2*Re + .8*Re [l];
    Im = .2*Im + .8*Im[l];
    If Im e > 0 and Rec > 0 then Period=
    36 O/ArcTangent(Im/Re ;
    If Period> 1.5*Period[ll then Period=
                   1. S*Period      [l];       ;
    If PeriodC .67*Period[ll then Period=
    .67*Period [l];
        If             PeriodC  6   then       Period= 6;     =
    If Period 50 then Period = 50;
    Period = .2*Period + .8*Period[ll;
    SmoothPeriod = .33*Period + .67*SmoothPeriod[l];
                   =                      +
    Length = IntPortion(CycPart*Period);
    MedianPrice = (High + Low + Close) / 3;
    Avg = 0;
    For count = 0 to Length- 1 begin 3;
    = Avg = Avg + MedianPrice [count];
        End;          =                           -
        Avg = Avg            /   Length;             [count]    ;
        MD      =  0;
         For       count=        0 to       Length-  1 begin
             =          MD  =  MD  +         AbsValue(MedianPrice[count] -
    For               Avg) ;                      -
         End;       =                             (MedianPrice [count] -
    MD = MD / Length;
    If MD C > 0 then CC1= (MedianPrice - Avg) /
  If = (O.OlS*MD);
                   <>              CCI     =   (MedianPrice  -  Avg) /
         Plot1        (CCI,              "CCI"
                                        ) ;
End;                         “CCI”);
End;
                               Figure 22.3.       (Continued).
                            Figure 22.3.       (Continued).

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

    EPILOGUE: SPLASH DOWN



 At Lift Off, we saidour goal wasto revolutionize the art of trad-
  ing by introducing the concept of modern digital signal process-
  ing. I hope you agree
        that this has led to thedevelopment of some
 profoundly effectivenew trading tools. More
        important, we hope
  that these new tradingtools have given you a new perspective
        on
  how to view the market as well as how to technically analyze it.
     Rocket Science for nuders was written on several levels.At
  one levelyouhavebeengivencookbookcodesfortrading
  systems with which you can begin trading immediately.The his-
  torical performance of these systems is on par, or exceeds, the
  performance of commercial systems that cost thousands of dol-
  lars. At another level you have genuinely new analysis tools,
  such as the Homodynecycleperiodmeasurer, the Signal-to-
  Noise Indicator,the Instantaneous Trendline, the Sinewave Indi-
  cator, and more.These indicators view the market from entirely
  new perspectives and therefore augment your existing tools. I
  invite you to read the book again-perhaps more than once-and
  reach the highest level possible. That level constitutes a deep
  understanding of both the market and our analysis processes.
     T h i s book is by no meansthe final word on digital signal pro-
  cessingas it applies to trading. Forexample,Ehlers filtersare
  engaged in a continuing state of research, evolution, and design.
  Through these efforts I hope to generate more accurate modelsof
  the market that will lead
        to even greater profits for traders.
        Iencour-
  age youto join me in this journey and boldly
        go where no trader has
  gone before.I look forwardto hearing about your adventures
        in the
  market and invite you to share the new horizons you reach.
market and invite you to share the new horizons you reach.

    239
    239

    FOR MORE INFORMATION



  Research is an ongoing process for me.The latestreports of my
  research can be found
        in technical papers and PowerPoint sem-
  inars on my Internet sitewww.mesasoftware.com.
     Users of Supercharts do not have a PowerEditor to write the
  EasyLanguage codeI have presented. Many users of Tradestation
  wish to avoid the work of coding and debugging the indicators,
  paintbars, and systems although they have the PowerEditor. For
  you to maximize the utility of this book, you can purchase the
  EasyLanguage Archive (ELA)files for direct transfer into your
  trading platform. You can purchase the ELA files from my web-
  site www.mesasoftware.com, or by contacting me at web-
site MESA Software or by contacting me at
     P.O. Box 1801
     Goleta, CA 9311G
     (800)633-6372

  Good Trading!
  John F. Ehlers
John Ehlers










    240
    240

    GLOSSARY



    amplitude Half the peak-to-peak value of the signal. This is
     equal to thelength of the phasor.
    analytic
     waveform The standard waveforms  with                 which
  traders are familiar, like the price history of a stock. An ana-
  lytic waveform contains either positive frequencies or nega-
  tive frequencies, but notboth.
angularfrequency Denoted by the Greek symbol omega (a).
  Angular frequency= 2*n;*frequency.
attenuate To make the wave amplitude smaller. omega (w).
baseband The information band of frequencies fallingbetween
  zero frequency andhalf the sampling frequency (the Nyquist
  frequency).
Cycle Mode Those times whenthe market data are short-term
  coherent. During these times, effective trading can be done by
  trading at thecyclic turning points using oscillator-type indi-
  cators.
decibel Ten times the logarithm of a power ratio. Zero dB cor-
  responds to a unity power ratio because Log(1)=0.Three dB
  corresponds to a power ratio of 2. The measure of -3 dB corre-
  sponds to a power ratio of 0.5. Six dB corresponds to a power
  ratio of 4. The measurement -6 dB corresponds to a power
  ratio of 0.25. Ten dl3 corresponds to a power ratio of 10.
detrend The process of removing static and slowly varying
  components from price data, leaving the residual to be the
  cycle components. Detrending can bedone in a variety of
  ways, the most simple of which is to takea momentum of the
  price. most simple of which is to take a momentum of the
 price.

     241
                  241

242
  directcurrent Current flowing from a battery, as opposed to
    alternating current, which flows from wall plugs. Direct cur-
    rent has zerofrequency. Direct current is analogous to the
    constant part of market price.
  EasyLanguage Computer code created by Omega Research for
    traders to write indicators and systems for Tradestation and
    SuperCharts. EasyLanguage is similar to Pascal with special
    keywords for trading.
  Ehlers filter A FIR filter whose coefficientsare ranked by a sta-
    tistic, but whose temporal location is retained. The coeffi-
    cients are normalized to the sum
        of the coefficients to ensure
    unity low-frequency gain. The coefficients may be nonlinear
    to support rapid and sustained price movements.
  Euler’sTheorem Sine and cosine can be expressed as complex
    exponential functions.
  exponential waveform The response of an ExponentialMoving
    Average (EMA)to an impulse excitation. The filter output de-
    cays rapidlyat first and maintains some finite outputforever.
  Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filter A type of filter that pro-
    vides an output only when an impulse is present within the
    filter window width. A Simple Moving Average (SMA)is this
    type of filter.
  Hilbert
        Transform A mathematical procedure that creates
    Inphase and Quadrature components ascomplex numbers
    from the analytic waveform.
  Homodyne Using the product of a signal multiplied by itself.
    A Homodyne Discriminator results from the multiplication of
    a complex signal with the complex conjugate of that signal
    delayed byone sample.
  imaginarynumber A real number located on the imaginary
    axis in thecomplex plane.
  Infinite Impulse Response ( I I R ) filter A type of filter that pro-
    vides an output forever after having an impulse applied to the
    input. This is because the output involves an iterative compu-
    tation using previous outputs as well as inputs. An Exponen-
    tial Moving Average( E M )is this type of filter.
  Inphase component The real part of the complex variable rep-
    resentation of the analytic waveform. The Inphase compo-
    nent is in phase with thecycle part of the data. compo-
   nent is in phase with the cycle part of the data.

                       Glossary                              243

instantaneousphase Computed as the arctangent of the ratio
  of the Quadrature component to theInphase component.
InstantaneousTrendline The Instantaneous Trendline is cre-
  ated by removing the dominant cycle signalcomponent from
  the price data, with the result being that the residual is the
  trend component. The Instantaneous Trendline is computed
  by taking a simple average whose length is equal to themeas-
  ured dominant cycle.
Lead Sine An indicator line that leads the sine of the dominant
  cycle by45 degrees in phase.
medianfilter A filter whose outputis the median value of
  prices contained within the filter observation window.
    NyquistfrequencyHalf     the sampling frequency. This is the
      highest frequency that can be assigned to the baseband of
      sampled data without inducing aliasing. The Nyquist fre-
      quency for daily price data is 0.5 cycles perday  (a 2-bar
      cycle).
    Nyquistsamplingcriteria        The sampled data must have at
  least two samples per cycle of the highest information fre-
  quency.
Ohm’s Law A basic law of electronics that says that voltage is
  equal to theproduct of current time resistance.
Order Statistic (OS)filter An OS filter is a filter that ranks the
  coefficients by a statistic rather than by temporal location
  within the filter. For example, a median filter (where the out-
  put is themedian value of prices within the filter window) is
  an OS filter.
passband The band of frequencies that are allowed to propa-
  gate through a filter with very little attenuation.
phasordiagram A phasor is a two-dimensional vector whose
  tail is attached to theorigin in a complex coordinate system.
  The phasor rotates with the angular frequency of the data
  cycle, and its length is equal to thewave amplitude.
power Power is proportional to wave amplitude squared. Power
   is invariant with phase angle.
 Quadrature
           component     Quadrature means being     at     right
       angles. The Quadrature component of the complex represen-
       tation of the analytic waveform leadsthe Inphase component
       by 90 degrees. waveform leads the InPhase component
     by 90 degrees.

    244        Glossary
  244               Glossary
  rotationaloperator The operator is j = f i . This operator
    rotates a real number by 90 degrees, for example from
        the real
    axis to theimaginary axis.
  sideband An information band of frequencies heterodyned
     onto the sampling frequency or a harmonic of the sampling
    frequency.
  Signal-to-Noise Ratio For trading purposes, noise is defined as
     the average range from
        high to low of the price bars. Signal-to-
     Noise Ratio is the power ratio of the wave amplitude to the
     noise.
    SineTrendAutomaticTradingSystem               An automatic trading
     system that changes rules according to       thedetermined market
     mode.
    stopband      The band of frequencies that are rejected or heavily
     attenuated by a filter.
    subordinate cycle          A calculation failure mode arising from
     rounding errorsin iterative calculations.
    transfer response  The characteristic of a filter. The description
     of the way a filter processes input data to provide the filtered
     output.
    TrendMode           Those times in the market when tradable cycles
     are not present. Trend Modetrading involves trend-following
     indicators, such as moving averages.     trend-following
   unity Having a value of 1.
   wave amplitude Half the peak-to-peakvalue of the signal. This
     is equal to the length of the phasor.
   zero frequency The cycle period is infinitely long. Direct cur-
     rent has zero frequency.
   Z Transform A tool foralgebraic solution of discrete system
Z problems. A tool for algebraic solution of discrete system
  problems.

INDEX


 A                                       C
 Aliasing, 3                             CD (ClosesDown), 228,229
A Alpha-Beta filter, 169        Cc Coherent waveshapes, 5
 Amplitude, 241                          Commodity Channel Index, 235
 Analog signal versus digital            Complex addition, 43-44
       signal, 2                         Complex numbers:     235
 Analog transfer function (converting     defined, 42
       into digital transfer function),   Euler’s Theorem, 46
       138-141                            expressed in exponential form,
 Analytic signal:         function),       44-47
      Inphase (cosine)component, 53,      expressed in polar coordinates, 44
       54,59                             Complex plane, 43
      Quadrature (sine)component, 54,    Complex signals, 53        44
       59                                Complex variables, 41-49
 Analytic waveform, 47,241     54,       Continuous systems:
 Angular frequency,46,241                 Fourier Transforms and, 135
 Attenuate, 241                           Laplace Transforms and, 135
 Automatic trading systems               Cosine functions, 46
      SineTrendAutomatic Trading         CU (ClosesUp), 228-229 135
       System, 119-130                   Cutoff frequency,6
      ZeroLag Intraday Trading System,   Cycle measurement comparison,
       170-175                             73-77
 Averaging, 17       Trading System,     Cycle mode, 12, 14, 15,21,35, 60,
                                           107,108,113,119,130,206,241
 B         17                            Cycle mode rules and criteria, 113,
 Baseband, 241                             119
B Bel (comparedwith decibel),5           Cycle period measurement, 63-77
 Bessel functions:                        Dual Differentiator technique, 70,
      Hankel Transforms and, 131           72, 73 measurement,
      Meijer Transforms and, 131          Homodyne Discriminator tech-
 Bicycle diagram,48,49                     nique, 67,69, 70
 Butterworth filter, 153, 155             Phase Accumulation technique,
 Butterworth filter tables, 156, 157       63, 64, 66
                                               technique,
Butterworth filter tables, 156,  157      63, 64, 66

           245

           245

246        Index
246        Index
Cyclic turning points in market (pha-     for computing Hilbert Oscillator,
       sor diagrams),215-225                90-92
Cylindrical coordinates:     (pha-        for computing Instantaneous
  Legendre Transforms and, 131              Trendline, 108-110
  Mellin Transformsand, 131               for computing MESA Adaptive
                                            Moving Average (MAMA),
D          Transforms and,   131            181-183
Decibel, 5, 241                           for computing OptimumPredictor,
Detrend, 241                                208-2 10
Detrending filter, 37                     for computing predictive filters,
Differential equation problems:             209-210
  Laplace Transform and, 132-134          for computing signal-to-noiseratio,
  Transform arithmeticand, 141              80-82
Diffusion equation, 11, 12, 14, 17        for computing SineTrend Auto-
Digital signal, 2                           matic Trading System,
Digital signal processing, 2     17         120-123
Digital signal versus analog              for computing Sinewave Indicator,
       signal, 2                            100-103
Discrete time signal, 2,3                 for computing ZeroLag Intraday
Distance coefficient Ehlers filter,         Trading System, 171-175
       193, 194                           for creating ASCII file of Inphase
Dominant cycle amplitude, 59                and Quadraturedata, 216,217
Dominant cycle period, 59                 for identlfying market mode,
Dominant cycle phase, 59                    114-117
Drunkard’s Walk problem, 11, 15,         Efficiency ratio, 178    mode,
       107,113,203                       Ehlers, John, 119
Dual Differentiator technique of         Ehlers filter, 185-195
       cycle periodmeasurement, 70,       characteristics of, 187
       73                                 EasyLanguage code for, 189
Dynamic Linked Library (DLL), 152         flexibility and adaptability, 191
                                          formulation, 187-188
E          Linked Library (DLL),    152   performance, 190        191
EasyLanguage, 6-7,     152,242            statistic, 188
EasyLanguage code                         term defined, 242
   for computing adaptive CCI,           Euler’s equations, 53
       236-237                           Euler’s Theorem, 46,242
   for computing adaptive RSI,           Exponential Moving Average (EMA),
       230-23     1                         2741,167-170
   for computing adaptive Stochastic,      characteristics of, 32  (EMA),
       233-234                             computing alpha term, 29
   for computing distance coefficient      as example of IIR filter, 166, 185
       Ehlers filter, 193                  in Kalman filtering, 167-170
   for computing dominantcycle             noise as, 80
       phase, 96-99                        Optimum Predictive Filter and,
   for computing Ehlers filter, 189
           205-206                        Optimum Predictive Filter and,
  for computing Ehlers filter, 189          205-206

             Index                                       247

             Index
        recursive factor, 27                   Homodyne Discriminator method
                                                         of
        response to step function, 28-29             cycle periodmeasurement, 67,
   Exponentialwaveform, 242                          69,70
   F         to step                           Homodyning, 242        67,
             waveform,
   Fast Fourier Transform(FFT)tool,            I         242
F        197                                   Imaginary numbers, 42-44,49
        constraints, 197-198  tool,  1         Improved Hilbert Transformer,
        unsuitability for market analysis,           57-58
         197                                   Impulse, 34     Transformer,
   Finite Impulse Response ( F I R ) filter,   Impulse invariant analog/digital con-
         143-150                                     version method, 138-141
        coefficient, 143  (FIR) filter,        Induced lag, 17        con-
        definition, 243                        Infinite Impulse Response (IIR)
        examples of, 143                             filters, 151-165
        impulse response, 143                       accuracy considerations, 152
        lag, 144, 150                               described, 242
   Following Adaptive Moving Average                limit cycles, 152   152
         (FAMA), 181                                rounding errors, 152
   Fourier series, 54 Moving Average                scaling considerations, 152
   Fourier theory,3                                 transfer response, 151
   Fourier Transform,23,24,55,134              Inphase component, 54,56,59-61,
        continuous systemsand, 135                   63, 64, 66,67, 69, 70, 72, 77, 79,
        parallels with Z Transform, 135              80,216,242
        steady-state analysis and, 134         Instantaneous phase, 242     77,79,
                                               Instantaneous Trendline, 22,23, 59,
   G                           134                   107-112,242
   Gauss, Karl Friedrich, 17                   Intraday trade, 170     22, 23, 59,
   Gaussian distribution, 17                   Inverse Laplace Transform, 138
   Gaussian filters, 156, 158-162
   Gaussian filter tables, 162-165             J      Laplace Transform, 138
   Group delay, 158                            Jerk, 34
                          162-165    J
   H         158                               K    34
   Hankel Transform, 131                       Kalman, R. E., 167
   Heterodyning, 3,51                          Kalman filtering, 167
   Hilbert Oscillator, 92                      Kaufman, Perry, 178
   Hilbert Transform, 51-62, 79, 95,           Kaufman's Adaptive Moving Average
         215,242                                     (KAMA),177-179
   Hilbert Transformer, 54-58,60, 67,                    Average
         206,207                               L (KAMA), 177-179
        improving amplituderesponse,           Lag, 17-19, 31, 64, 95, 158,
         57                                          159
        minimizing lag, 58                     Lag (removing),167-176
   Homodyne Discriminator, 228                 Lane, Dr. George, 232

      Homodyne Discriminator, 228        Lane, Dr. George, 232

248                                        Index
248         Index
Laplace Transform                                   Weighted Moving Average (WMA),
       continuous systemsand, 135                     25-27
       differential equations and,                Multipole filter, 153    (WMA),
        132-134
       transient conditions in electrical         N   filter, 153
        circuits and, 132-134                     Negativefrequency, 5 1
Lead Sine, 243                                 N Negative numbers(as mathematical
Legendre Transform, 131                               concept), 41
Linear filters, 185                               N e w Concepts in Technical nading
Lower sideband, 52                                    Systems (Wilder), 228
Low-pass filters, 158                             N e w Technical nuder, The(Chande
M       filters,     158                              and boll), 179
                                                  Noise, 79, 80, 83, 93  (Chande
M Market analysis (measuring market               Nonlinear filters, 185
        spectra), 197-203                         Normal distribution, 17
Market cycle, 47      market                      Nyquist frequency, 3,243
Market efficiency hypothesis, 9                   Nyquist sampling criteria, 52,243
Market mode identification:                       Nyquist sampling theorem,
                                                                            3
       Cycle mode criteria, 113
       Trend mode criteria, 113-1 14              0   sampling theorem, 3
Market modes, 9-15                                Ohm's Law, 243
Mean Deviation (MD),235                        o Optimized Stochastic Indicator, 232
Median filter:                                    Optimum estimation (concept), 167
       characteristics, 186                       Optimum Predictive Filters, 205-213
       defined, 243                                 conditions for validity, 206
Meijer Transform, 131                               defined, 205-206
Mellin Transform, 131                               ExponentialMoving Average
MESA Adaptive Moving Average                          (EMA) and,205-206
        (MAMA),179-181                              overview, 205
MESA spectrum measurementtech-                    Optimum Predictor, 208-21 1
        nique, 198,200-203                        Order Statistic (OS)filters, 186,243
Momentum        tech-                      ~~     Orthogonal numbers,43
       defined, 35                                        243
       as adetrending filter, 37                  P   numbers, 43
       and sinewave, 35                           Pascal computer language, 6
Momentum functions, 33-40                      P  Passband, 243
Moving averages, 1 7 3 2                          Periodic impulse train, 3
       characteristics of, 17,32                  Phase Accumulation technique
                                                          of
       Exponential Moving Average                     cycle periodmeasurement,
        (EMA), 27-31                           Phase  63-64,66
       induced lag, 17     Average                Phase shift, 21
       predictive moving averages, 212            Phasor diagrams
       purpose of, 31                               for anticipating cyclic turning
       Simple Moving Average (SMA),                   points in market, 215-225
        18-25     Average (SMA),                    defined, 243    215-225
       18-25                                      defined, 243

                                                   Index                                  249
                                                   Index                                  249
       dominant cycle, 48-49                                instantaneous trendline, 22-23
       secondary cycle, 48-49                               lag,19-20
       for Sinewave Indicator, 100                          momentum of, 39-40     22-23
  Poisson probability distribution, 206                     phase shift, 21-22
  Pole, 152                                                 static lag, 18-21
  Power, 243     distribution, 206                  Sine functions, 46
  Predictive filters, 205-213                       SineTrend Automatic Trading Sys-
                                                             tem, 119-130
  Q              filters, 205-213                           applied to Deutschemark futures,
  Quadrature, 54                                             128
  Quadrature component, 54,56,                              applied to Treasury bondfutures,
        59-61, 63,64, 66, 67, 69, 70, 72,                    119-130
        77, 79, 80,216,243                                  EasyLanguage code for, 120-123
  R     77,79,    80,216, 243    69,  70,  72,              performance after optimizing
                                                             instantaneous trendline, 125,
  Ramp function, 33-34                                       127,128
  Random Walk Model, 10-1
                                     1                      performance using complete
  Random Walks: Theoryand Selected                           system, 124
        Applications (Weissand Rubin),                      performance usingcycle mode
        10                                                   only, 124
  Real numbers, 42-44,49                 Rubin),            performance usingtrend mode
  Redmont, Rick, 229                                         only, 124
  Relative phases, 49     49                        Sinewave Indicator, 59,95-105
  Relative Strength Indicator (RSI),                        advantages as a cycle mode predic-
        l-2,228-229                                          tive indicator, 100
  Removing lag, 167-176              (RSI),                 EasyLanguage code for, predic-
  Rotating phasor, 49                                        100-103
  Rotational operator (defined),243-244             Slater, Tim, 229     for,
  Rubin, R. J.,10                                   Smoothing, 17, 19,20,26,31
                 operator (defined), 243-244        S W P futures, 170-1 75
  S              10                                 Spherical coordinates: 26, 31
  Sampled data, 131                                         Legendre Transformsand, 131
  Sampling frequency,51,52                                  Mellin Transforms and, 131
  Sideband, 244                                     Statistical Theoryof Communica-
  Signal amplitude, 47,79, 80                                tion (Lee),206
  Signal-to-noiseratio, 59, 79-89,244               StochasticIndicator, 229,232
  Signal-to-noise-ratiocomputation,                 Stopband, 244
        80-83                                       Suboptimal filters, 168     232
  Signal-to-noise-ratiocomputation                  Subordinate cycle, 244
        (alternate method),83,86-88
  Simple Moving Average(SMA),18-25                  T            cycle, 244
       attenuation, 24-25                           Telegrapher’s Equation, 11-12, 14
characteristics of, 32 (SMA), 18-25 Theory and ApplicationofDigital
       as example ofFIR filter, 143, 145,                    Signal Processing (Rabinerand
             150,185                                         Gold),54
       as        of FIR filter,      143,  145,                  (Rabiner and
             150, 185                                        Gold), 54

     250                                Index
 250                                   Index
                                       (Kauf-   W
     Tkading Systems and Methods
         man), 178, 197                         Wave amplitude, 244
     Transfer response, 244     (Kauf-          Weighted Moving Average (WMA),
     Transform arithmetic, 131-141               25-27
     Transforms:                                 characteristics of, 32 (WMA),
        Fourier Transform, 134                   compared with Simple Moving
        Hankel Transform, 131                    Average, 25
        Laplace Transform, 132-134               as example of FIR filter, 144
        Legendre Transform, 131                  reduced lag,26-27
        Meijer Transform, 131                   Whiffles, 49          144
        Mellin Transform, 131                   Wiener-Hopf equation, 206
        Z Transform, 131,135-138                Wilder, Welles, 227
     Transient analysis, 132-134                                   206
Treasury bondsfutures contract, 119, Z Welles, 227
         124,125,127                            ZEMA (zero-lagEMA), 169-170
Trend mode, 12,14, 15, 107, 119, Z Zero (as mathematicalconcept), 41
 Trend   108,113,119,130,207,                   Zero frequency,244
            244                                 Zero frequency harmonic,52 41
     Trend moderules andcriteria,               ZeroLag Exponential Moving Aver-
         113-1 14,119                            age, 170
     Trends, 107-1 12     criteria,             ZeroLag Instantaneous Trendline,
     Trigonometric identities, 53                170
     U       identities, 53                     ZeroLag Intraday Trading System:
     unity, 244                                  EasyLanguage code for,172-1 75
 u Upper sideband, 52                            trading rules, 171, 175
                                                Z Transform:
     V   sideband,  52                     Z     defined, 244      175
     Variable IndexDynamic Average               discrete systems and, 135-138
 Vv      (VIDYA),179                             parallels with Fourier Transform,
     Volatility, 179     Average                  135
                                                 sampled data and, 131
 Volatility, 179                                sampled data and,  131
