        A PEEK INTO THE FUTURE
        By John Ehlers

Trading would be considerably less difficult if we could look into the future. Of course
that is literally impossible, but signal processing can provide a filter with negative group
delay. That filter is described in this article. While it really cannot look into the future, it
can provide signals in advance of signals used by other traders – and that may be enough
to create a successful trading edge.

There are two kinds of delay associated with signal processing filters: These are group
delay and phase delay. It is perhaps easiest to understand them by considering a five
bar simple moving average. Signals at the output of this moving average are delayed by
exactly two bars at all frequencies. That is group delay. If we examine the filter output
relative to an input of a cycle having a 20 bar period, the two bar group delay becomes
a phase delay that is 10% of the cycle period, or 36 degrees. If we examine the filter
output relative to an input cycle having a 10 bar period, the phase delay is 20% of the
cycle period, or 72 degrees.

An Exponential Moving Average (EMA) filter, on the other hand, has a large group delay
at very long signal periods, reducing to a minimum delay at the highest possible sample
frequency (Nyquist frequency). This group delay is nonlinear across the spectrum,
making the phase delay even more nonlinear. In signal processing, group delay is used
as a measure of signal distortion because signals arrive at the filter output in different
phase relationships than existed at the filter input. Parenthetically, since market data is
generally noisy with a wide spectral bandwidth, filter group and phase distortions have
led to some interesting interpretations of technical indicators.

In general, it is best to minimize group and phase delays in technical indicators because
minimization naturally improves indicator robustness in different market conditions. I
discovered “a Universal Negative Group Delay Filter for the Prediction of Band-Limited
Signals”¹, which I have renamed the Voss predictive filter. The derivation of the filter is
complicated and long, but the filter itself is very simple. I will describe it in code in Code
Listing 1.

There is a qualification required by the Voss predictive filter that the input signal be band
limited. Market data can reasonably be described as having an unlimited bandwidth, and
so the Voss predictive filter must be preceded by a band limiting filter to be useful in
technical analysis. The simplest filter to use for this application is my two pole bandpass
filter². This filter is also described in Code Listing 1. Please remember that this Bandpass
filter is also subject to nonlinear group and phase delays. Because a band limited input

1 Henning U. Voss, "A universal negative group delay filter for the prediction of band-limited signals"
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.07326
2 John Ehlers, “Cycle Analytics for Traders”, Chapter 5, John Wiley & Sons

signal is a requirement for the Voss filter, a true overall prediction is not possible. But
reducing lag is always a good thing for technical analysis.

The Voss predictive filter is described with reference to the EasyLanguage code in Code
Listing 1.

 Code Listing 1. Voss Predictive Filter
 Inputs:
      Period(20),
      Predict(3);

 Vars:
      Order(0),
      F1(0), G1(0), S1(0), Bandwidth(.25),
      count(0),
      SumC(0),
      Filt(0),
      Voss(0);

 If CurrentBar = 1 Then Begin
      Order = 3*Predict;
      F1 = Cosine(360 / Period);
      G1 = Cosine(Bandwidth*360 / Period);
      S1 = 1 / G1 - SquareRoot( 1 / (G1*G1) - 1);
 End;

 //Band Limit the input data with a wide band BandPass Filter
 Filt = .5*(1 - S1)*(Close - Close[2]) + F1*(1 + S1)*Filt[1] - S1*Filt[2];
 If CurrentBar <= 5 Then Filt = 0;

 //Compute Voss predictor
 SumC = 0;
 For count = 0 to Order - 1 Begin
      SumC = SumC + ((count + 1) / Order)*Voss[Order - count];
 End;
 Voss = ((3 + Order) / 2)*Filt - SumC;

 Plot1(Filt);
 Plot2(Voss);

The input variables are the center period of the band-limiting Bandpass filter and the
number of bars forward of prediction to be produced. You can experiment with the inputs
for your application, but I recommend that you do not exceed 3 bars of prediction.      The
reason is that the output becomes noisier as the prediction is increased.      The only way

to reduce the output noise is to reduce the bandwidth of the Bandpass filter. Of course,
reducing the bandwidth increases the group and phase lags of the filter with the result
that it is a no-win solution.

After the variables are declared, the filter constants are computed once on the first bar
on the chart. The Voss predictive filter constant called “Order” is approximately three
times the desired prediction.

Next, the two pole Bandpass filter I describe in my book is computed as “Filt”. Filt then
becomes the input into the Voss predictive filter.

The Voss predictive filter consists of multiple time-delayed feedback terms in order to
accomplish anticipatory coupling, leading to negative group delay for frequency
components within the passband of the Bandpass filter.

The prediction of the Voss predictive filter is plotted relative to the output of the Bandpass
filter so the prediction of the filter is obvious. The relationship between the two plots and
be used to develop trading rules, which is beyond the scope of this article.

The performance of the Voss predictive filter is shown in Figure 1, where it is applied to
a little more than a year’s worth of data of SPY. The red indicator line is the output of
the Bandpass Filter and the blue indicator line is the Voss predictive filter output. It is
obvious that the blue line precedes the red line in its motion, and is therefore predictive.
During the Spring of 2018 SPY was in a cyclic mode with an approximate monthly (20
bar) cycle period. The Bandpass filter accurately tracked the peaks and valleys of the
market movement. Thus, the crossings of the blue line relative to the red line at is peaks
and valleys were excellent sell and buy signals, respectively. The performance of the
filter can be estimated by lining the indicator crossovers relative to the peaks and valleys
in the price action of the barchart.

On the other hand, SPY went into a trend mode in January 2019, and the cycle signal
failed miserably, signaling a short position during the runup. This failure was not due to
a failure of the prediction. Rather, the failure was basically a result of no information
being within the passband of the Bandpass filter. The only way to minimize the impact
of this condition is to employ an additional trend detector.

The Voss predictive filter is another new tool that can improve your trading edge by giving
you a peek into the future when the conditions are right. I hope it works well for you.

SPY(D)- Daily ARCX L=275.04 0.03 0.01% B=27499 A=275.04 0=27294 Hi=274.65 Lo=272.42 V=85795,799
                                      hai                                                          290.00
                                  a
    £  JAy            Wo ayfoxyi      nee    |                           }     Ix|[]   |   /ⁱᶠ     274.4
                                                                                                   250.00
                                                                                   [               240.00

    1  Voss 20,3  0.03 -1.43

                                                                                                   4.00

                                                                                               10.03
                                                                                                   -1.43
                                                                                                   -4.00

       Feb        Mar  Apr  May Jun Jul                        Aug Sep Ot   Nov Dec   19   Feb  Mar
    Figure 1.                     Voss Predictive Filter Anticipates Cyclic Turns in the Market